**Transcript extracted from YouTube video**

Kind: captions
Language: en
You have to take seriously this claim on
the part of the Nazi leadership that
they wanted a thousand-year reich.
[Applause]
is no joke.
&gt;&gt; Perhaps the best known abduction of all
and one of the earliest reported is the
abduction of a wellrespected New England
couple, Betty and Barney Hill.
&gt;&gt; Look back at Barney Hill's original
statements.
&gt;&gt; The evil face.
&gt;&gt; Mankind has been seeking knowledge.
&gt;&gt; Allan Dulles and his brother John Foster
Dulles together with JP Morgan Chase and
Rockefeller Mhm.
&gt;&gt; funded the rise of the Nazis. is the
implication that there's some sort of
Nazi sleeper cell undergirling American
politics today.
[Laughter]
So, World War II is not what we think it
is. They were seeing these rocketlike
things that were saucer shaped being
launched from Spain, the Mediterranean
coast over toward America.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; One year later, what happens? Roswell. I
mean, is the idea that there is some
sort of like Atlantean surviving remnant
group that's still there?
&gt;&gt; So, for all we know, what's happening is
that a future state of a certain culture
is contacting itself in the past,
&gt;&gt; trying to pull the timeline towards
itself or something.
&gt;&gt; Actualize itself, transe temporally
actualize itself.
[Music]
&gt;&gt; Different parts of the brain have
different activities. But you know that,
don't you?
[Music]
&gt;&gt; Maybe you should interview me.
[Music]
&gt;&gt; Jason Resa, Georgiani, back by popular
demand. Thank you so much for for coming
on. And yeah, we just launched an
episode and people are are absolutely
loving it. So check that out, part one.
Uh, but there's so many other threads I
wanted to get into and I I I left that
conversation thinking that there was a
lot that was left kind of unsaid and we
could have gone on for hours. So, I'm
very excited to do this. You're one of
the few thinkers I know uh who doesn't
just sort of uh know a bunch of random
disperate facts around the phenomenon,
but tries to piece them together into
some sort of coherent worldview, which
is kind of a a herculean task. Um, but
you're attempting to to do that and I I
can't think of too many other I mean
Jacqu Filet might be another one. Um,
but there aren't too many thinkers
trying to do that. So, this is very
cool. Thank you. You know, that made me
think of something that actually, you
know, would probably be a good preface
to this conversation
because I think that one of the most
significant crises that we face in our
civilization and, you know, in the world
at large is the decline of philosophy.
Um the the reduction of philosophy to
academic scholasticism and logic
chopping
uh and the lack of
uh deep serious broadspectctrum thinking
that would be capable of for example
tackling the close encounter phenomenon,
&gt;&gt; right? I mean obviously it should be
philosophers who are engaging both with
the data of close encounters and
parasychological data. Uh in fact you
know there were people in philosophy um
who played a fundamental role in
development of parasychology at its
outset. Both William James and Henry
Bergson
&gt;&gt; were among the founding parasychologists
&gt;&gt; in the era of psychical research. In
fact, William James was the president of
the society for psychical research uh in
the 1870s. So he was
&gt;&gt; and Bergson was as well later on in the
1910s or something like that.
&gt;&gt; There you go. And and and this is a time
when parasychology wasn't relegated to
quacky circles and you know newagy
conferences. You had Berg Son was was
debating Einstein at the time and so he
was considered a worthy debate partner
for Einstein who himself wasn't you know
fully accepted by mainstream science but
was very well respected. Yes. And James
had predicted uh in the era when he was
the president of the society for
psychical research that this would be
the next great scientific revolution
&gt;&gt; right what I in my writings have called
the spectral revolution and it didn't
happen
&gt;&gt; and you know in my first book from aus
and atlas I ventured a um you know a
basically theory of why it didn't happen
and uh that's because of the extremely
ly serious psychological and
sociological implications of mainstream
acceptance of things like telepathy,
precognition, clairvoyance, and so
forth. And so, you know, it's not only
essential for philosophers to engage
with the onlogical and epistemological
questions inherent in parasychological
data or close encounter um phenomena,
but also the ethical and political
ramifications. And this brings me to
what I wanted to say in response to to
your opening, which is that
I've made an argument now in several of
my books that it's definitional to the
type of the philosopher
to develop concepts that cut across all
of the major domains of philosophy from
ontology and epistemology to then an
ethics and a politics that follow from
that. at ontological and epistemic
thinking and then also I think
aesthetics is very important from the
time of Plato onward there's been this
idea that uh the cultivation of
aesthetic discernment and the capacity
to perceive the beautiful or the sublime
is also another pathway to knowledge
&gt;&gt; and perhaps to a kind of knowledge that
transcends or undergards ructive
rationality Right. And and in
particular, I think that aesthetic
judgment is very closely connected to
ethics and it's something that, you
know, Nze understood, Frederick Nichze
understood very well.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. He says, I think there's some
quote, I'm going to butcher it, but it's
like life is only eternally justified in
its aesthetic form or something. And he
yeah, he he fully believed that.
&gt;&gt; And Nietze wasn't alone. I mean look if
you I mean Kant is well known for being
a very principled
uh hyperrational
advocate of this cris crystalline
universal ethics
&gt;&gt; but K if you ask me Kant's most
interesting work is his aesthetic work
and it's in his aesthetics and his third
critique critique of judgment that you
can see the connection between Kant's
interest in the occult
&gt;&gt; and Kant's development of this universal
ethics Then for example, Hegel has an
entire account of how you can see the
evolution of human consciousness or what
he called spirit through changes in
aesthetic styles, changes in uh you know
artistic expression from epoch to epoch
and how they reflect the evolution of
the perceptive and cognitive capacities
of humanity. So okay my point is that to
be a philosopher
you really have to be thinking across
all of these domains and developing
concepts that cut across them above all
because you cannot have any unquestioned
presuppositions. M so you could be the
most brilliant let's say metaphysician
right and someone who's developing a
very rigorous epistemology
but if you have unquestioned political
presuppositions
it's going to be tacidly warping your
ontology and epistemology
&gt;&gt; and if you want to really be a
philosopher you know which is to say
someone who from the era of Socrates
onward was defined by boundless,
limitless and and thoroughgoing
questioning
&gt;&gt; you you uh really cannot give yourself
the luxury of unquestioned assumptions
in any area
&gt;&gt; right so I mean this has very serious
implications for religion obviously
because it means that it's definitional
to a philosopher
that he or she I consider iron ran for
example to be a real philosopher in this
sense uh he or she cannot not accept any
religion.
&gt;&gt; You it is definitional to a philosopher
that you cannot adhere to a religious
belief system other I mean you are uh
crippling yourself and your you know
your basically capacity to question and
develop concepts from the outset if you
have any kind of a religious commitment.
&gt;&gt; So would you say St. Thomas Aquinas not
a philosopher?
&gt;&gt; Exactly. So the entirety of medieval
European philosophy is not philosophy
and none of these people were
philosophers. And also in Iran, you
know, I spent a lot of time um
&gt;&gt; both studying Iran
&gt;&gt; and also making significant
contributions to Iranian studies. My
book Iranian Leviathan is a tome
&gt;&gt; on the history of Iran from Zarahustra
to the Islamic Republic. And so what
this also means is that this whole era
that's that's um misnamed the Islamic
Golden Age, which really was like an
Iranian renaissance from the 1100 from
the 900s to the 1100s,
&gt;&gt; really doesn't have very many
philosophers involved with it because
these people were essentially Islamic
theologians of the type of Thomas
Aquinus. Like for example, uh Al Farabi.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um Al Farabi goes to the extent of
equating Muhammad with Plato's ideal of
the philosopher king, which is an
absolute travesty. The only thinkers in
that era that really uh exemplified the
type of the philosopher were for example
um uh Rozi
uh whose writings almost completely were
destroyed by various you know
&gt;&gt; inquisitors uh later on once the Turks
came in and and resolidified uh Islam in
in Iran. um and maybe shahabaldi
but it means that that whole period in
Iran very much like Europeans medieval
so-called philosophy really doesn't pass
muster
&gt;&gt; but why am I getting into all this the
point is that it seems almost as if
we're entering another dark age now
&gt;&gt; uh with the lack of substantive
philosophical thinking and fewer and
fewer individuals who really passm
muster as exemplary of the type of the
philosopher in the way that let's say in
the 20th century we had Martin Haidiger
Jean Paul
um Ludvik Vickenstein and other really
uh deep thinkers so a philosopher can't
be an extension of state power or
religious power is is is sort of what
you're you're getting I mean to play
devil's advocate you have philosophers
like Leo Strauss also mid
&gt;&gt; not a philosophy so you'd say non
philosopher Strauss said so. Strauss
literally said,
&gt;&gt; "I am not a philosopher. Do not call me
a philosopher. I'm a professor of
philosophy and a political thinker."
&gt;&gt; But in Straussian double speak, that
could mean I am a philosopher. So it's
like
&gt;&gt; he he meant it. He meant it. And the
more shocking thing that Strauss said
was at the same time as he made the
statement, he said Martin Haidiger is
the only living philosopher.
&gt;&gt; Which coming from out of the mouth of a
Jew was is quite a striking statement,
right? I mean
&gt;&gt; Haidiger having been a high level Nazi
functionary
&gt;&gt; but wouldn't a Straussian read on many
past philosophers be that many of them
had to exceed to kind of the
conventional thought of the time but
then secretly they could hold their own
kind of heretical beliefs. So like I you
know I'm trying to think of a good
example like was you know one of the
enlightenment era you know Francis Bacon
not really a philosopher kind of a
philosopher but like you know he would
say things like you know we need
empiricism to prove out God's secrets or
to you know understand the divine nature
of the world and reality and the
Straussian read on that is like he's
sort of a deist or an atheist and he
doesn't believe in God at all and he's
just sort of you know uh placating and
paying lip service to you know the
establishment power.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think that through careful study
that could be verified. So, you brought
up the case of Francis Bacon. There is a
theory that uh will I am Shake Spear
&gt;&gt; is a pen name for Sir Francis Bacon.
&gt;&gt; People think that.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Now, if someone were to engage in
an exhaustive philosophical analysis of
the works of Shake Spear,
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; uh and be able to prove that that was
indeed a literary persona of Sir Francis
Bacon.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Then I think a very good case
could be made that Francis Bacon was a
first- rate philosopher because there's
an ethics, there's a political
philosophy in Shakespeare, you know, and
you could reconstruct that. So that
would be a case of an actual philosopher
engaging in esoteric writing in order to
express the full range of his thought.
&gt;&gt; Do you believe that Shakespeare was in
fact Francis Bacon?
&gt;&gt; I think it's possible. I think there's
an argument there. I I I don't have the
range of Shakespeare scholarship to
anywhere close to it to be able to
assess that. I think it was like, you
know, there are all these kind of occult
references like in King Lear or
something like these, you know, things
were
&gt;&gt; forgot the exact argument, but it was
like Stratford upon even wasn't super
far from where Bacon was. And then, you
know, all these things are mentioned
like 33 times and who knows? But
&gt;&gt; I mean, look, it's clearly
&gt;&gt; Bacon was prolific. You know,
&gt;&gt; will I am
&gt;&gt; I am will,
&gt;&gt; you know, the will. I'm the will.
&gt;&gt; Shake spear. The shaking of the spear,
right,
&gt;&gt; is clearly a pseudonym
&gt;&gt; for someone who was an incredible
genius.
&gt;&gt; So, who the hell was that guy like at
that time who was living and, you know,
who maybe uh expressed his genius in
other ways as in the scientific writings
of of B and then there's the New
Atlantis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, anyway, it could be. Look, but my
point is this, that
that's one thing, but if you're a
philosopher who's, let me rephrase that.
If you're a metaphysician who's afraid
to express a political philosophy
because you might be persecuted by the
religious authorities of the day and you
just don't uh put pen to paper, you
know, in any way even even let's say as
a set of secret writings that you
consign to somebody to be postumously
published. If you just never put pen to
paper to express any kind of coherent
political philosophy or ethics that
follows from your ontology and
epistmology, you're not a philosopher.
You're a coward. M okay. And so for
example in Iran we had an example of
somebody like that was uh Abnina or as
they call him Abby Senna in the west
great metaphysician
maybe he has some ethics
&gt;&gt; but he did not develop a coherent
political philosophy which uh as I see
it disqualifies him as the type of the
philosopher
&gt;&gt; and he made a deathbed confession. When
we first started selling merchandise at
americanalchemymerch.com,
we had no idea how complicated and
annoying selling merch could be, we
talked to a dozen different platforms
and companies comparing shipping tools,
payment options, website builders, and
it all felt like way more of a headache
and complicated than it should be. We
decided on Shopify, and within days, our
store was up. Everything was running
cleanly in an automated way, so we could
just focus on the brand and the vision
we had for it. That's when it hit us.
Ideas don't scale on inspiration alone.
They need a structure, a container.
Shopify provides that structure. It
quietly powers millions of creators and
brands, about 10% of all United States
e-commerce. From big names like Gym
Shark and Mattel to solo creators
building from their bedrooms, Shopify
made it simple to build a store that
actually feels authentic to us, which
matters when your brand lives in a niche
like alternative tech, UFOs, or fringe
science. And when you have a very clear
brand vision, plus their AI tools help
write descriptions, organize products,
even clean up photos so we can focus on
what matters and what we care about.
building the best custom merch line
possible with the coolest designs like
our UFO cowboy tea and the atomic age
tee. Plus, Shopify handles all of the
unglamorous, more painful stuff.
Shipping, returns, email marketing, all
in one clean dashboard. It's like having
a silent partner who never sleeps. Our
favorite part of the product is the
dashboard, which gives us complete
demographic information. We can see
where our orders come from, making it
easy to know who our most loyal,
consistent customers are around the
world. That's just one example, but
Shopify really makes your life easier.
Bring your next idea to life with
Shopify quietly handling everything
behind it. Sign up for your $1 per month
trial and start today at
shopify.com/jesse.
Again, that's shopify.com/jesse.j
ssse for a $1 a month trial. Again,
that's just $1 a month to try Shopify,
the state-of-the-art solution in
e-commerce,
&gt;&gt; saying that, you know, these bastard
Islamic clerics have made it impossible
to think freely in this country
&gt;&gt; and that I had to basically dissimulate
and and warp all of my ideas and and my
writings out of constant fear of
persecution by the authorities. So, he
did say that before he died. M m okay I
want
&gt;&gt; to be a philosopher you got you have to
risk that and you have to be willing to
be turned into a human torch like
Jordano Bruno in the town square Rome or
Socrates or Pythagoras who had his
schools burned down in his own lifetime
right
&gt;&gt; oh I didn't know that about Pythagoras
&gt;&gt; yeah I mean some say he died in the
fires others say he barely escaped with
his life and died from injuries shortly
thereafter but Pythagoras was the first
one to be martyed in the history of
philosophy and then Socrates and then
they almost killed both Plato and
Aristotle.
&gt;&gt; Plato went to Syracuse to try to
convince this tyrant uh Dianisis to
become a philosopher chain as he had you
know
&gt;&gt; outlined in Republic.
&gt;&gt; Um and basically the entire court of
Syracuse conspired against Plato and he
had to escape by boat in the middle of
the night narrowly escaped with his
life.
&gt;&gt; Uh and then Aristotle willingly left
Athens because there was a plot to have
him prosecuted also. M so this is
endemic to the history of philosophy
&gt;&gt; when was this pre-tutoring Alexander the
Great or or post or
&gt;&gt; it was pre because Alexander was younger
right and then and they say by the way
out that Alexander didn't like Aristotle
&gt;&gt; really
&gt;&gt; why didn't he like him
&gt;&gt; Aristotle
ran a think tank in addition to being
like a a philosopher you know engaged in
his own individual exploration and and
contemplation he had essentially like
the the prototype of the Rand
Corporation in classical Greece and
various other citystates would come to
him
&gt;&gt; and uh he would write their
constitutions for them secretly. You
know, you don't want to tell your people
that their constitution comes from some
guy's think tank in Athens if you're
living in Corinth or you know Sparta or
whatever. But they would come to him and
he would write and part of his political
philosophy that informed his writing
constitutions for various citystates
was that we should always have a
political plurverse. He was very much
against one unifying government. He
Aristotle was the first uh serious
thinker to critique the idea of world
government.
&gt;&gt; And so for example, he was very wary of
the Persians
&gt;&gt; who wanted to establish a kind of uh you
know
&gt;&gt; humanistic one world order, right?
&gt;&gt; Well, uh Alexander actually had great
reverence for the Persians. In
particular, his hero was Cyrus the
Great, the founder of the Persian
Empire. Uh the first thing he did when
he got to Iran was he he had them take
him to the tomb of Cyrus so that he
could pay his respects to Cyrus the
Great.
And eventually uh Alexander became
convinced that the Persians had the
right worldview and that the whole uh
earth and all of its cultures should be
unified into a single cosmopolitan order
which eventually was reflected in the
culture of the city of Alexandria that
was named after him in Egypt became like
the cosmopolitan bastion of the world
right so this is diametrically opposed
to Aristotle's thinking
&gt;&gt; you know Alexander becomes the exemplar
of the idea of the one world order and
you know Aristotle is the first uh
critic of it.
&gt;&gt; That's so fascinating when things like
that happen. Modern example of that
would be like George Soros and Victor
Orban who's kind of a mentee and mentor
and like Soros is obviously all about
spreading as much democracy as possible.
Orban was kind of his understudy and
then now you know it's totally split off
and is you know basically the tip of the
spear when it comes to European
nationalism.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And uh you know that's it almost feels
Shakespearean in some ways. Now that's
the other thing about the type of the
philosopher which is very
dangerous
&gt;&gt; is the relationship between the
philosopher and the state
&gt;&gt; because
frankly you cannot be a nationalist and
be a philosopher
&gt;&gt; okay so any philosopher who seems like a
nationalist like says a Martin Haidiger
right who literally was you know a Nazi
functionary
&gt;&gt; Mhm. they're engaging in I was about to
say Straussian rather in platonic
dissimulation and some kind of a noble
lie.
&gt;&gt; So do you think Haidiger was not a real
philosopher?
&gt;&gt; No. Haidiger was not a real nationalist.
&gt;&gt; Was not a real nationalist.
&gt;&gt; And when you study Haidiger deeply you
see that it's very clear but only to
someone with an esoteric eye for it and
who can think together with him on a
deep level understand what he's really
saying.
&gt;&gt; Right? So he was trying to use the
German state in a certain way. uh that
had to do with his understanding of the
threat posed to humanity by modern
technology and a way that he thought
that the German state could be shaped to
confront the instrumentalizing and
mechanizing threat of modern technology
&gt;&gt; to shepherd technological development in
a certain direction that would prevent
the um instrumentalization
of humanity and our alienation from our
existential essence, right? So, but the
deeper question is is this like I mean
Socrates was executed by the Athenian
state, right?
And in his uh discourse on the arts and
sciences, Jeanjac Rouso
says that the Athenians were justified
in doing this because the guy was a
menace to the social order and to the
political uh cohesion of Athens
&gt;&gt; and that any thinker has to um has to
basically reconcile himself to the
sovereignty of the state and to like uh
basically accommodating the social
order, Right. So, Russo actually thinks
the philosophers, you know, pose this
like fundamental
uh, you know, um, enimical challenge to
state power.
&gt;&gt; And I think that on some level he's
right.
&gt;&gt; But the irony also is that especially in
grave crisis and what Carl Schmidt
called states of emergency,
&gt;&gt; I think it's also the philosophers of a
people who can save a people. You know,
a a nation that lacks a philosopher or
lacks deep thinkers in a moment of grave
crisis is not going to make it.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Mhm. No, that feels very right to
me. And it feels like
the modern world has very few. I think
of big philosophers today and you know,
you're sort of one of them. And then you
have, you know, guys like Slavo Jizek or
whatever who's, you know, super too
postmodern for my taste, but, you know,
he's at least attempting. And then, I
don't know, even Jordan Peterson in my
mind, who I think he sort of falls prey
to it's like narcissism of small
differences between him and
postmodernism because I think his his
stuff sort of melts into a postmodern
gobblelygook or whatever. But he's he's
trying he's, you know, read all the
right stuff or whatever. But there are
very few philosophers who are uh very
ambitious. You know, I think most
philosophy professors at universities
just give you these very conventional
kind of lame um limited by modern
epistemics
reads of these past philosophers and
you're sort of supposed to there's a
great um actually essay by Nichze um
called on history and he talks about
undigested stones of knowledge and it
feels like that's what they're they're
just they're just passing on these
undigested stones of knowledge. They're
not actually processing any any of what
they're saying. Yes, in that essay
that's incredibly important essay it
became fundamental to Haidiger's
thinking and Haidiger basically quotes
it at the beginning of being in time and
it also has become very important to my
work
&gt;&gt; in particular that book Iranian
Leviathan that I mentioned the subtitle
is a monumental history of Mithra's
abode
&gt;&gt; and that term monumental history is from
that essay of Nichza the uses and abuses
of history for life
&gt;&gt; and uh he basically says that there's
three modes of history One is
antiquarian history which is what
traditionalists do where they glorify
the past right and like the ultimate
form of this is the Hindu or ancient
Greek worldview where there was a golden
age and then it decayed into a silver
age and a bronze age and so and so
history is declining right
&gt;&gt; and all we can do is try to hold on to
fragments of the past to the better days
and to preserve as much of our heritage
as possible I mean it's conservatism
&gt;&gt; in an onlogical sense
Then there's critical history which is
what these POMO people do like you're
just mentioning Xjek right is like you
know probably yeah the greatest living
exemplar of postmodern philosophy right
&gt;&gt; and u critical history is all about
deconstructing power structures and
showing how uh basically every
institution and even every structure of
knowledge was ultimately the product of
a power game that somebody was
and that it benefits either some class
interest or institutional interest or
you know is a product of rivalry between
uh nations or ethnicities and so on and
so forth and that it's all oppressive
and it should all be deconstructed. It's
like pouring acid on history and the
achievements of of all people throughout
time, right? And
Nietze says, "Okay, to be fair,
under really oppressive
conditions that are resulting in social
sterility and that are hampering
innovation and novel cultural
development. A little bit of critical
history is a good thing because it
breaks up oified structures and it
allows creativity to be unleashed again,
right?"
&gt;&gt; So Michelle Fuko is a great example.
Michelle Fuku is the ultimate critical
historian. I mean, that was basically
his project. Everything's a power game.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Uh and with all these histories that he
engaged in including history of
sexuality, you know, history of the
prison system, history of psychology and
then and his own personal life who sort
of, you know, was who's kind of a
pervert to be honest and and I think it
was kind of an expression of the
morality that comes from that kind of
work.
&gt;&gt; I'll tell you what's also an expression
of that is that Fuko endorsed Ayatani
and the Islamic revolution in Iran. I
mean, how lost do you have to be in
postmodern nonsense that you think it's
a liberation to help a misogynistic
theocratic repressive regime come to
power? Right? Anyway, so that's critical
history. And then the last modality of
history that Nichze discusses in that
essay which is the one that he
personally embraces and that I have and
that that's been very important to my
work is monumental history
&gt;&gt; which is the idea that
monumentalizing
certain past achievements
turning certain historical figures into
icons that can continue to provide
inspiration and having essentially a
folkloric approach
one's heritage.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So that it doesn't become an oified
tradition but it becomes a source of
inspiration
uh where you can um dynamically adopt
and adapt your heritage for future
development.
&gt;&gt; That's vital to the life of a people.
And he says that it's like, you know, a
tree whose branches can only grow toward
the sun of destiny if it's deeply rooted
in the earth and its roots are healthy
underground. And that underground is the
subconscious.
&gt;&gt; It's that, you know, monumental history
is nourished from out of the
subconscious
&gt;&gt; and not everything in the past of a
people
&gt;&gt; uh has to be or should be rationally
dissected and understood. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; that we we need to maintain a kind of
subconscious connection to the mythic
substratum
&gt;&gt; of our heritage as a wellspring for
continued creativity both in the arts
and the sciences.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I love that. He's so inspiring
when you read him. I like, you know, he
is he seems very irrational and kind of
iconoclastic and uh maybe a little
crazy, you know, in his personal life
and stuff. And so Nichi was almost like
the first incel or something. But uh but
he was also just so inspiring. You read
his work and it's it's it's full of
vitality in life. So it felt like this
weird juxosition. You had his you know
kind of personal life which he was kind
of you know withering away and then then
you have the writing which was so vital.
I love him. I feel a very deep affinity
to Nietze. I'd say Plato, Nietze and
Haidiger are probably the three
philosophers who most deeply impacted my
own thinking. Well, you mentioned the
Rand Corporation. We're in Santa Monica
right now near the Rand Corporation. I
believe RAND stands for R&amp;D, research
and development. Was formed in, I
believe, the mid to late 50s. Uh, one of
these sort of federally funded research
and development centers. Um, that was
meant to look into all sorts of issues
of national security. It's kind of a,
you know, it says when we talk about the
proverbial deep state, you think of the
Rand Corporation and a man who was
offered to be president of the Rand
Corporation. Some people might not know
this is a past interviewee of mine, guy
named Harold Malmgrren, who was a senior
presidential adviser for JFK, LBJ,
Nixon, and Ford, and said all sorts of
really bombshell stuff when it came to
UFOs, including he held pieces of a UFO
uh at Sandia Complex in New Mexico. Who
was it was given to him by Lawrence
Preston Gist, who's Jeff Bezos's
maternal grandfather,
uh which is fascinating. And uh he
talked about the magenta crash Malmrren
did uh and his his his mentor Richard
Bissell who founded Area 51 briefing him
on other worldly technologies. Yeah.
What else did Richard Bissell tell you?
&gt;&gt; He said this didn't start last week.
This has been going on.
He mentioned 1933
magenta.
&gt;&gt; He did.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Richard Bissell mentioned the 1933
magenta. Correct.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; That's amazing. So this provided a lot
of backup for David Grush's, you know,
famous UFO whistleblower who's
responsible for a lot of modern
disclosure today. His testimony around
this magenta crash where he came out, he
said that there are covert American UFO
reverse engineering programs. We have
this whole history on this stuff. But he
also said he talked about one specific
crash and it wasn't Roswell. It was this
uh Lombardi, you know, northern Italy
crash specifically in Magenta, Italy.
&gt;&gt; 1933 was the first recovery in Europe in
uh Magenta, Italy. Italian government
moved it to a secure air base in Italy
for the the rest of kind of the fascist
regime until 1944 1945 and you know the
Pope Pius the 12th backchanneled that.
&gt;&gt; So the Vatican was involved.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. and told the Americans what the
Italians had and and we ended up
scooping it.
&gt;&gt; And you have some interesting
connections that you've made between
that and Nazi prowess in engineering at
the time. As you know, I'm always on the
hunt for things that help me stay sharp,
focused, and full of energy while I'm
diving into life's mysteries and making
this show happen. And I've got to say,
Mudwater has completely transformed my
mornings. Back in the day, I used to
struggle with that post coffee crash.
And let's not even get into the caffeine
jitters. Mud water gave me the smooth,
steady energy I was missing. It's packed
with functional mushrooms like lion's
mane, chaga, and rayi. Plus, turmeric
and cacao all working together to keep
me focused, calm, and grounded.
Honestly, it's like coffee went on a
yoga retreat and came back zen. What I
love most is that it's not just about
replacing coffee. It's a whole new
ritual. It's a simple, nourishing way to
start the day. and I actually look
forward to it every morning. Every
ingredient is USDA certified organic,
vegan, non-GMO, and there's zero sugar.
It's energy that doesn't mess with your
sleep or make you question your life
choices at 3:00 a.m. Ready to make the
switch to cleaner energy? Head to
mudwater.com,
that's mudwt.com,
and grab your starter kit today. Right
now, our listeners get an exclusive deal
up to 43% off your entire order, plus
free shipping and a free rechargeable
frother when you use code Jesse. That's
right, up to 43% off with code jesse at
mudwtr.com.
After your purchase, they'll ask you how
you found them. Please show your support
and let them know we sent you. keep your
energy natural and refreshing all year
long with mud water because life's too
short for anything less than clean,
delicious energy. And so what do you
have to say about all of that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So as as far as I understand it,
the Vatican was informed of it. the
Vatican was informed of it and has a
dossier on it and the Vatican was
involved in the
sort of study of this uh object
um in a joint working group that
involved both SS scientists and uh
Italian scientists in a third-party
country. So when I wrote my book closer
encounter,
&gt;&gt; did he say third party country?
No, but I know it's a third party
country because that's where the
so-called Bell project winds up being
developed, namely just outside Prague
&gt;&gt; in Czech, former Czechoslovakia. Okay.
In the Czech Republic.
&gt;&gt; And so when I was doing my research for
Closer Encounters, we did not yet have
the testimony from Rush about Magenta. I
wrote that book in 2021 or it was
published in 2021. Uh so I studied the
um Nazi advanced propulsion research
that was going on again at a facility
called the SCOD works just outside
Prague under the direction of SS General
Hans Comler.
After Gush made this testimony about
Magenta, I realized why they put it
there. Because if the Italians had found
this object and at least from one angle,
this was a reverse engineering project,
&gt;&gt; then it makes sense to have chosen a
country that was neither Italy nor
Germany. The Italians needed the German
technical expertise. They were not going
to figure out what the hell this thing
was by themselves. Even though they had
some very competent scientists, but
still they knew that they had to call
the Germans in. And yet the Germans
probably wanted to, you know,
uh, wanted to respect the Italians by
putting this project in a third country
that was neither Germany nor Italy.
Right? So it was sort of a compromise
access compromise to put it in um,
Czechoslovakia.
Now,
it's it's an interesting question. How
much of what they were doing there was
an attempt to reverse engineer whatever
crashed at Magenta? Uh, and how much of
it was a result of uh Germans grappling
with some real nuts and bolts practical
engineering problems. So, let me give
you an example.
The saucer airframe very naturally
evolved from German aeronautical
engineering.
&gt;&gt; They were taking very seriously in the
1930s the problem of um aerodynamics and
the boundary layer that where a a pocket
of air resistance forms around the edges
of an aircraft
&gt;&gt; and it causes drag and impedes
maneuverability.
So they came up with the idea of
creating a saucer-shaped craft that
would have suction vents all around it.
And these suction vents would uh
basically suck in the boundary layer
&gt;&gt; and then redirect the uh the the air
pocket into the propulsion system
&gt;&gt; as as part of the propulsion system. And
another interesting thing that they
developed in connection with this
problem of uh suctioning of the boundary
layer and basically making a much more
aerodynamic aircraft was they developed
a kind of perforated metal
which later was discovered uh at Roswell
&gt;&gt; really
&gt;&gt; according to Corso
um and it was a kind of metal where you
could put your hand on the other side of
it and blow through the metal and feel
your breath on your hand a perforated
finely perforated metal.
&gt;&gt; Do you know the name of this metal?
&gt;&gt; I think in German it was called Luftwam
Lu Luft.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And then Corso
&gt;&gt; flying foam.
&gt;&gt; And how do how do we know? So then for
context, 1947 famous proverbial, you
know, archetypal UFO crash occurs in
Roswell, which is the home of the uh
59th Atomic Bomber Squadron led by
Curtis Lame. sort of makes, you know,
uh, well, it made the Roswell Daily
Record got popularized actually way
later in 1979.
Um, but you're saying that the metal
found there
&gt;&gt; matches
&gt;&gt; what was discovered in Nazi Germany?
&gt;&gt; Some of it. Some of it. Now, here's the
thing about Roswell, and we'll come back
to this.
&gt;&gt; Is this what Jesse Marcel handled that
metal?
&gt;&gt; I don't know. Okay.
&gt;&gt; I don't know.
&gt;&gt; The memory metal.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, certainly memory metal was
found there.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Whether these are the same thing
and whether the memory metal was this
perforated metal, I don't know,
&gt;&gt; but supposedly that that was also found
there.
&gt;&gt; Does Corso say that the perforated metal
that was found at Roswell matches Nazi?
Um Joseph Farrell did a study of Corso's
claims in the day after Roswell in a
book which I believe is called Saucer
Swastikas and Scops
&gt;&gt; and he went in detail into various
cuttingedge German uh technological
innovations of the 1940s particularly
military engineering
&gt;&gt; and he makes a number of really
significant points in this regard. Uh,
among the things found at Roswell,
according to Corso, was Kevlar.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Velcro.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Night vision.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And fiber optics.
&gt;&gt; And lasers, I believe.
&gt;&gt; And lasers.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Every Now, this I mean, okay, I guess
space aliens could be using Kevlar.
Maybe they could be using Velcro, too.
But uh Farrell researched this and he
provides documentation that shows that
the Germans had invented every single
one of these in the 1940s. They were not
in common use. They were not even
accessible to the majority of the German
military. But they were being tested uh
you know as sort of cutting edge uh
weapons technology especially like in
the North African desert in 1943 44.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I believe there's the first patent
for a transistor is in Munich or
something in the in the 30s. So
&gt;&gt; yeah, that's interesting.
&gt;&gt; Well, well, when we went in there, you
know, to Nazi Germany, we found that the
German subsidiary of IBM, a company
called Demog
&gt;&gt; was way ahead
&gt;&gt; not only of like all the other American
transistor manufacturers, but ahead of
the American IBM. So the German
subsidiary was like developing
transistors that were much order of
magnitude smaller than what we had in
the United States. But this brings up
two really important questions. One is
what caused this just general
technological acceleration in Nazi
Germany in the you know 20s30s and 40s
that I mean really 30s and 40s. If you
think about Hitler took power in 1933
which was you know you have like 10
years to build up and you get all sorts
of I mean look at V2 rockets are like 20
30 years ahead of anything in the in the
west. Um you know all the Vundafa you
know their fighter jets were the skunk
works was kind of a response to the fact
that their fighter jets were running
circles around ours. So what accounts
for that? A and then B, if they are so
advanced technologically,
why did the United States ultimately,
you know, prevail and beat them in World
War II?
&gt;&gt; Well, that's a subject that I, you know,
I hope we can get into in some level of
detail.
&gt;&gt; Um,
&gt;&gt; I wonder if if I should flesh out a
couple more things about the engineering
at Scot Works before we then come back
to this
&gt;&gt; and and really dive into it head on. Uh
they were developing these saucer
airframes with suction vents and so on
and so forth. But these were rocket
powered.
&gt;&gt; They had rotating rockets underneath
these saucer shaped craft.
&gt;&gt; Rotating rockets.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Like like um a series of jet jets
&gt;&gt; like put in a in like in a fan formation
&gt;&gt; uh to basically maneuver these saucers
shaped craft in various directions. So
it was a jet aircraft. In other words,
it was a saucer shaped rocket powered
aircraft.
Then parallel to this saucer airframe
project, there was another project which
uh when I did my research in closer
encounters working from Joseph Farrell
and um Nick Cook's book, The Hunt for
Zero Point, Nick Cook's research and
then also his citations of Igor Wowsk's
research, Polish researcher who actually
went to this site and and did some field
work there. Uh, I assumed that this
project based on those researchers, I
assume that this project began like in
the early 1940s.
I've since been informed by somebody who
had relatively direct knowledge,
somebody in Serbia.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That it went back to 1937.
&gt;&gt; Who is this person?
&gt;&gt; Um, I don't want to mention the person's
name, but they a very old person who was
involved with some of these individuals
back in the day in Central and Eastern
Europe.
And so it from what I hear from him it
started in 1937
and this was a project to basically
develop uh originally their aim was to
develop a new power source a power
plant.
&gt;&gt; Involving the electromagnetic
rotation of mercury and thorium.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So I think it's thorium 232 if I
remember correctly
&gt;&gt; mixed with a certain isotope of mercury.
&gt;&gt; And the reason for mixing it with
mercury is that mercury is
electromagnetically reactive. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So if you want to rotate the thorium
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; um using electromagnets,
mixing the thorium with mercury allows
you to rotate the thorium very
effectively create thorium torsion.
&gt;&gt; And this device would be continuously
powered by alternating current and
intermittently shocked with very high
voltage direct current. And basically
what it did was it would create a a kind
of plasma fusion
from out of which tremendous energy
flowed.
&gt;&gt; So so it was a overunity device where
you would be putting a certain amount of
energy into it both AC and DC but then
the nuclear reaction of the thorium
due to electromagnetic torsion would
produce more energy than was being put
into the device. Is he high conviction
that that's I mean so you're saying this
sort of they had like a zero point
energy device.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yes.
&gt;&gt; Because that's
&gt;&gt; that's the idea that that's what
Wakowski
um Nick Cook and Joseph Farrell are all
saying looking at the bell.
&gt;&gt; Well Nick Cook it. So yeah a lot of his
stuff came from Wikowski and it's
amazing. I mean he takes it the little
boat ride under they go underground and
you can see the rig where DLCO was. So
it was definitely a real project and
Hans Conmer was a, you know, very real
guy. He had, you know, control of of of
works, which was kind of the really
black world, you know, exciting projects
going on as opposed to kind of the white
world, you know, Heisenberg nuclear
project. Uh, but there are all sorts of
rumors about DLA. I mean, some people
say it was like a time machine. When you
talk to Nick Cook, he's he gets like a a
little uncomfortable as my read almost
as if he knows something that he like
can't really talk about or something,
&gt;&gt; but he'll he'll say I think it was a
black world nuclear project. Over time,
I have come to conclude that it was
probably a one of several sites that the
Germans, the SS in particular, were
using to look into uh nuclear weapons,
nuclear technology,
&gt;&gt; which
both of those things are true. I think
both of those things are true and we can
unpack both of them.
&gt;&gt; So, first let's start from the time the
time angle, right?
&gt;&gt; You know how we're always diving into
the edge of science and consciousness on
this show. Lately, I've been thinking a
lot about aging. Not just in terms of
years, but in how it actually feels in
the body. Slower recovery, lower energy,
that middle-aged fog that sneaks up on
you. I feel like I can barely go out and
drink alcohol anymore. That's why I
started using something called
qualiaenolytic. And it's been a major
shift for me. Let me explain. As we age,
our bodies accumulate what scientists
call scineesscent cells, also known as
zombie cells. These are worn out cells
that stop dividing but don't die. They
hang around in your body, draining your
energy, clogging up your recovery, and
generally making you feel older than you
are. Qualioenolytic is a firstofits-kind
supplement formulated with nine
plant-based compounds designed to help
your body naturally eliminate these
zombie cells. It's not something you
take every day, just 2 days a month, but
it supports your body in aging better at
the cellular level. Since I've started
taking it, I've felt sharper, lighter,
and like my body's resilience has come
back online. It's vegan, non-GMO, and
grounded in serious research. Experience
the science of feeling younger. Go to
qualia.com/jessie
for up to 50% off your purchase and use
code jesse. Again, that's j s for an
additional 15% off. That's qu u l i a l
i f.com/jessej
ss for an extra 15% off your purchase.
Thanks so much to Qualia for sponsoring
this episode.
&gt;&gt; So I think I I assume
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; that or let's say I suspect that they
were looking for a a
incredible power plant originally.
But the reason that rig exists
&gt;&gt; is because they realized that this thing
levitates when you turn it on
&gt;&gt; and they had to chain it down.
&gt;&gt; And so this whatever uh kind of energy
was being generated also resulted in
counterar. It was it was a an anti- in
other words it developed a local local
gravitational field around itself.
&gt;&gt; Anti-gravity.
Um, but the other more interesting thing
is that it they would put plants around
this thing and they would turn to mulch.
They were like cellularly disrupted.
They were disrupted on a cellular level
and they would basically disintegrate
&gt;&gt; and supposedly the entire first team of
scientists that worked around this thing
died very quickly and they had to
replace them all. And we do know from
Wowski for a fact that the lead
scientists was a guy it was a guy named
Ernest Growitz who I believe was an SS
medical officer who worked directly
under Joseph Mangala. So if you were
putting sort of biological specimens you
know in this sort of torsion field you
know he would be relevant and then a guy
named Walter Gerlock who worked at a
local university and was extremely
interested in gravity. M so yeah sort of
to your point
&gt;&gt; absolutely and Gerlock was involved in
like also magnetic engineering and stuff
like that um
electromagnetic engineering and stuff
like that. So um but and the people who
I mean the first group of them
eventually died experienced extreme
temporal disorientation. M so they would
this is what they the reports are you
know from uh Whitowski and and Farrell
uh that they experience time flowing at
a different rate than people outside the
laboratory
&gt;&gt; and that it became extremely
disorienting and eventually cognitively
debilitating to them.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So time machine well you know maybe not
at that stage but some kind of a time
disruptor.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. that it's it is interfering with
the uh fabric of spaceime.
&gt;&gt; And for people who think we're crazy,
general relativity even would allow for
that in a on a go forward sense because
if you you know create a high density or
you know you create a high energy
environment, there are two ways to
basically uh uh warp spaceime. It's you
know mass and energy. And with both you
you you would encounter sort of time
displacement. And so with this, you
know, black hole where you have like,
you know, you're going to slow time the
closer you get to it. So high voltage
experimentation and things of that
nature or, you know, nuclear experiment,
you might, you know, incur some sort of
time displacement as well.
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; And and say you were to like do that in
a more
&gt;&gt; and wasn't Townson Brown obsessed with
like time travel?
&gt;&gt; Who's obsessed with time travel? And he
like Agnu Bonson who funded him was
famous for saying that uh you know in
high m high megabolt range you know um
electricity experiments very anomalous
uh things would occur phenomena would
occur and towns and brown definitely
thought that his work led would lead you
to a working model of time travel and to
get even more specific with how that
might work in the context of digaas the
rumor was that there was a ceramic
chamber you know internally uh to
protect, you know, whatever biological
organism was being sort of tested in
this environment. And by the way, this
is a Nazi regime that definitely
experimented on human beings. Twin
studies with Joseph Mangala,
experimental cell block 9, where they
try to cryionically freeze people. Like
border science was very invogue. So
you'd put a person in this ceramic
chamber, you create a torsion field
around it, uh, and basically you'd slow
time on the inside to, you know, say
1,000th of a second. And you know uh uh
uh if a person spent a year inside this
chamber, you'd walk out and you'd be a
thousand years in the future. And that
doesn't break Hawkings chronological
conjecture. It works with general
relativity. It makes theoretical sense.
There are all these engineering issues
with it presumably, but what you're
saying isn't totally crazy for the
audience. And and unfortunately, I'm
sure that they brought concentration
camp inmates and put them in there.
&gt;&gt; I'm sure I'm sure they did that.
&gt;&gt; So, okay. So, you have this bell. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And then you Oh, by the way, an
alternate name for the bell was debinto,
the beehive,
&gt;&gt; which is interesting because
they say the reason they called it that
is that it makes the sound of a bunch of
bees buzzing together when you turn this
thing on.
&gt;&gt; And there have been people who reported
that in relation to UFO closeing. Yeah,
we heard a sound in that direction. It
was sort of like a buzzing noise. It was
a very, you know, it was like a buzzing.
It kind of sounded like bees, but more
like a Yeah, like a machine bee sound.
So, just very strange.
&gt;&gt; What was the craft like? So, you're
you're in the inside of this thing. What
did it look like?
&gt;&gt; A beehive.
&gt;&gt; So, they had this bell and they had this
saucer shaped airframe that initially
was being uh, you know, propelled by
rockets. They took the rockets out, put
the bell in it, and there's your flying
saucer.
&gt;&gt; It's the integration of the bell with
the saucer airframe as the propulsion
system for the saucer. You know, when
the first public patent for a flying
saucer was
&gt;&gt; when 1937.
&gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. A guy named Henry Kanda
who was Romanian, but eventually he was,
you know, overtaken by by the Nazis and
bec and started to work with them. Then
and then and then he went over to Reich
Pat and worked with uh the Americans on
the Avro car project which is probably a
front for some deeper deeper stuff that
you're kind of getting into right now.
&gt;&gt; Um so I find that interesting as well.
&gt;&gt; Well, that makes a very good point too
in so far as scientific breakthroughs
never only occur once and never come
through only one person.
&gt;&gt; Anyone who studies the history of
science knows this. And one of the most
ignorant points made today uh to dispute
the idea that let's say the Nazis could
have cracked ZPE back in the ' 40s and
and had you know saucer propulsion uh is
well somebody else should have come up
with it you know like either before or
by now or whatever. First of all the
last few decades are full of cases of
people coming up with like interesting
energy devices and either being bought
out or being made to disappear or
whatever you know meeting some kind of
misfortune. But going back to that era,
yes, other people arrived at the same
thing. Townson Brown arrived at
something similar. Nicola Tesla had
already arrived at something similar
decades earlier. Uh even if he didn't
patent it, and you know, Tesla was
notorious for not properly patenting
things.
&gt;&gt; His drawings of the world wireless
system are full of UFOs.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Wingless,
electrogravitically
powered craft. They are all over Tesla's
drawings. It's not as if the Nazis like
came up with this like, you know,
municiple. And the effects that you're
mentioning, people having incurred, you
know, time displacement, disorientation,
all the reports of the Philadelphia
experiment, which was led by Thomas
Towns and Brown, who had a nervous
breakdown at that time and had to move
out to LA and then started working for
uh, you know, Martin Corporation the
year that Skunk Works started.
uh all all of the same sort of reports
of what you're describing time
displacement I believe uh people think
they might have used thorium in that as
well or or maybe it was hexafllorite I
don't remember but um very interesting
the parallels there too people people
said you know they went back in time
they went forward in time there are all
sorts of fantastical stories about it
nobody knows quite what happened it had
a very large budget attached to it so
could have been this parallel kind of
you know thing which which which often
happens in science as you just said.
&gt;&gt; Yep. Yep. And so now here's the picture.
It's so from based on, you know, the
research that that I've done that I cite
in Closer Encounters,
it's 1944
&gt;&gt; when they figure out finally how to
integrate. Well, they they finish work
on the bell, at least a prototype of it,
and they figure out how to integrate it
with the saucer airframe.
&gt;&gt; 1944.
&gt;&gt; So, they're already losing the war. The
Germans are losing the war. The the
Allies are marching on them.
It's increasingly a losing battle and
Nazi leadership starts to make these
statements about how there are these
wonder weapons that are being developed
and once the wonder weapons the
vundervafa are finished then Germany
will dramatically turn the tide and
secure like 11th hour victory in the war
but it's all dependent on these wonder
weapons and don't worry they're coming
right this this rhetoric starts to
emerge from out of party leadership
&gt;&gt; autot scores
who at that time was the master of
psychological warfare and special
operations
&gt;&gt; shows up to the SCOD works and
supposedly he's given a demonstration of
this thing
&gt;&gt; and he gets obsessed with the idea of
using this thing as part of some grand
psychological warfare operation
&gt;&gt; and then we have so this is 1944 right
fast forward to a year after the end of
the war
there are these newspaper reports in
Spain
that
Scorzani is with General Franco
&gt;&gt; on the Mediterranean coast and they're
launching saucershaped rockets toward
America,
&gt;&gt; right? They didn't know what to call
these things at that time, right? They
had they didn't know what rockets were.
They were seeing these rocket like
things that were saucer shaped being
launched from Spain, the Mediterranean
coast over toward America.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; One year later, what happens? Roswell
and other crashes.
&gt;&gt; Whoa. What are the reports of Franco
launching saucers with Scorzani?
&gt;&gt; This is in uh I think it's in the saucer
swastikos and scops book of Pharaoh
where he reproduces these Spanish
newspaper reports.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yes. From 1946
describing the two of them together uh
with of course a bunch of military
people uh on the Mediterranean coast of
Spain.
&gt;&gt; And you think that these things that
made its way to Roswell, New Mexico
possibly?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And the picture is a lot darker
than that. Here's here's what I think
happened.
We all know about Operation Paperclip.
You've discussed it at length on your
show.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; What fewer people know about is the
incorporation of the Galen organization
into American intelligence.
&gt;&gt; Right. So remember, the Soviets are
marching across all of Eastern Europe,
taking all this territory that had been
part of the Reich.
There's a whole network of Nazi SS
affiliated intelligence operatives in
Eastern Europe
&gt;&gt; who continue to be embedded there as the
Soviets are marching over the territory.
&gt;&gt; so what happens in 1945 when America
wins the war
immediately at a strategic level it's
understood that our enemy is now the
Soviet Union and the world is divided at
Berlin right
and if we are going to uh conduct
successful espionage on the Soviets we
would have to build a vast spy network
in Eastern Europe well there's already
one there okay it's the network that was
run by General Reinhard
&gt;&gt; Galen
&gt;&gt; so our OSS
makes a deal with General Galen to
absorb his entire Nazi spy network in
Eastern Europe as part of the creation
of the CIA. Part of the creation of the
CIA and of West German intelligence,
which was very closely affiliated with
the CIA.
So, it's not just the case that we
brought over all these Nazi scientists.
By we, I mean the CIA.
It's that the CIA that brought over all
those Nazi scientists and sanitized
their records, you know, these
paperclip, the files, the sanitized
files they created for them, sanitized
bios and so forth. The CIA that did that
was co-constituted by absorbing a an SS
spy network. H well, think about what
kind of culture that's creating in
America. Okay. As the National Security
Act is passed in 1947,
why is the National Security Act passed
in 1947? Let's talk about a guilt-free
alternative to alcohol that's perfect
for your dry January or anytime you want
to unwind. Cornbread's organic CBD
gummies. These gummies are an absolute
lifesaver for my evening routine.
They're a natural way to relax,
celebrate, or wind down without the
hangover. I've cut back a lot on my
alcohol consumption over the last few
years. For a lot of you, trying out Dry
January or cutting back generally, it's
not always easy. But swapping that glass
of wine for cornbread CBD gummies is a
total gamecher. It's a simple upgrade to
your evening routine that leaves you
feeling great the next day without
sacrificing the fun. Plus, with all
natural ingredients, they're the perfect
way to stay balanced. Cornbread hemp
isn't just a product. It's a small way
to bring balance into your life. Whether
you're journaling, meditating, or simply
enjoying some downtime, these gummies
elevate the experience without any of
the guilt. It's like having a moment of
calm in your pocket, ready whenever you
need it. Alcohol doesn't have to be the
default anymore. Whether you're cutting
back for dry January or just looking for
a healthier way to relax, you've got to
try Cornbread CBD gummies. Right now,
American Alchemy listeners can save 30%
on their first order. Just head to
cornbreadhemp.com/jesse
and use code jesse at checkout. Again,
that's cornbread.com/jesse
code Jesse. Cornbread hemp. This is the
good life. Could it have to do with what
happened at Roswell and the need to
create a vast unaccountable
inscrable security apparatus?
&gt;&gt; It could have been direct reaction. I
believe the National Security Act was
September 1947 and Roswell was July of
1947. A lot of people speculate that.
&gt;&gt; So, so here's what I think. It's a
hydra.
The Nazis
created the crisis at Roswell. They
staged an event. Now, let me not be
misinterpreted, okay? As anyone who
listened to our first conversation can
see, I'm not by any means suggesting
that like grays or whatever like
manufactured by Nazis or what, you know,
or that all of the crashes have to do
with Nazis. No, no, no. Not not by any
stretch of the imagination.
&gt;&gt; You think Roswell was accounted for
&gt;&gt; specifically Roswell?
&gt;&gt; By Nazis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Like for example, there was a
crash that Jacqu Valet gets into in his
book Trinity that took place a couple
years ear no uh 3 years earlier
&gt;&gt; right after the Trinity detonation near
the test site something came down.
&gt;&gt; It was 20 days after the test.
&gt;&gt; And the beings who were witnessed coming
from out of that craft were like praying
mantis uh like like you know gr
something like between a gray and a
praying mantis childlike
&gt;&gt; insectoid entities. Okay. Those were not
they didn't have anything to do with the
Nazis.
&gt;&gt; They were uh baldheaded
um slang eyes, teardrop eyes, no ears,
unless they had had a a coating of
something on it. And I noticed that the
their shoulders were kind of narrow but
had long arms. And what I surprised me
that they had four fingers. So I'm not
suggesting that like all these crashes,
okay, have to do with Nazi psychological
operations, but the particular incident
that Roswell, I think, did
&gt;&gt; really. Is that just based on the Franco
Scorzani shooting s?
&gt;&gt; No, it's based on the analysis of what
was recovered there and that all of it
represents cutting edge German
technology
&gt;&gt; based on Corso's testimony of the
technology recovered there and then
looking into history of cutting edge
German military technological
innovations. But 47 is 2 years after the
official surrender of you know you know
VE day surrender of Germany. So why
would they
&gt;&gt; when you look at the instruments of
surrender
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So a number of things are relevant here.
Let's go through them one by one. When
you look at the instruments of surrender
&gt;&gt; the German army, air force, navy and the
German government surrender.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; The SS never surrenders.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; The SS is not included in the German
instruments of surrender. Is that
because they're inherently the secret
police or
&gt;&gt; it's because they continued. They did
not surrender and
certain particular SS officers not just
continued but developed highlevel
intelligence and financial relations
with both the United States and the
United Kingdom.
&gt;&gt; But wasn't that still under the United
State like I think of you know Warner
von Braun or a lot of these guys they're
sort of under the US's thumb you know
ultimately the US sort of you know
wielded authority and power over them.
No,
&gt;&gt; you don't think so.
&gt;&gt; So when von Braonn, who was, by the way,
an SS major who used slave labor to
build rockets in basically a
concentration camp inside of a mountain
&gt;&gt; and then became responsible for the
American space program essentially.
Yeah. when von Braonn and his buddies um
were down in um
Texas and during the period they were in
Texas.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh at one point they it was noticed by
American I probably the FBI
&gt;&gt; that they were going in meeting Nazi
counterparts coming from Argentina at
border towns in Mexico and giving them
data drops. They were giving uh
classified American military data to
their Nazi counterparts coming from
Argentina
&gt;&gt; in meetings in Mexico. So they were
confronted about this by the Americans.
&gt;&gt; Next thing you know, a V2 rocket goes
off course and hits a a place in Mexico.
&gt;&gt; No way.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And the the von bronze people
basically intimated to the Americans,
you know, if you make working conditions
hard for us and and keep grilling us
like this, you know, rockets are bound
to go off course and maybe, you know, a
war with Mexico might even start.
&gt;&gt; What? So they were being hassled by
these people in a way that suggests that
these Nazis had a lot more control and
latitude than the civilian government of
the United States
&gt;&gt; wanted to believe was the case. And I
think that degree of control is coming
from the deep state that was established
through the National Security Act of
1947. In other words, the CIA, probably
the NSA, and various other apparatuses
of our deep state in America were
co-constituted
by the remnants of the SS.
And this isn't unique to America with
like like for example the absorption of
the Galen network into the OSS to create
the CIA. It's also the case with the
British. So Ian Fleming, who went on to
write the Bond novels, was an MI6
operative
whose specific mission at the end of the
war was to facilitate the evacuation of
Martin Borman to Argentina.
&gt;&gt; Martin Borman was like the financial
mastermind of the Reich.
And uh he supposedly died three times. H
&gt;&gt; there are three conflicting accounts of
this man's death
&gt;&gt; from 19 like 45 to 47.
&gt;&gt; Next thing you know he has a joint bank
account with Juan Peron in Argentina.
&gt;&gt; And as late as the 1960s Martin Borman
is cashing checks written in his own
name through Chase JP Morgan Chase in
Buenes Iris.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
So the British are involved too. And
then this Ian Fleming MI6, you know,
operative winds up becoming a novelist
who writes about an organization called
Spectre,
&gt;&gt; which is a hidden third power in the
world.
&gt;&gt; So the villain in the Bondverse, right,
&gt;&gt; is a secret transnational
global organization that's capable of
rivaling both the Soviet Union and the
civilian government of the United
States. Whoa. Well, I guess Spectre,
they have like German accents, a lot of
them, don't they? Or
&gt;&gt; it's very obviously the organization
which was known to Ian Fleming as
Odessa, the um initials of which in
German stand for order of former SS
officers and which informally was
referred to as Dpina or the spider.
Fascinating. Really? Well, that's that's
really amazing. That's so interesting.
And do do you know anything because I
believe the inspiration for Ian Fleming
for James Bond was um uh William
Stevenson who was known as Churchill's
super spy. He was a sort of Canadian
British uh actually and I had an identic
memory was an engineer and then also was
this kind of brilliant super spy
strategist. And so was he ever fighting
the spider in any sort of way? Cuz that
would like instantiate this even more.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. That I don't know. That I don't
know. But I know that Fleming was
involved with them and facilitating. I
think that
&gt;&gt; the leadership of this organization
uh basically um was was taken over by
Martin Borman
&gt;&gt; uh and probably Otto Scorzani was in the
second position
&gt;&gt; once these people um basically set up
shop in Argentina. One of the most
interesting things that they did in
Argentina
was they promised they were going to
develop fusion power and fusion nuclear
weapons for Juan Peron.
And this guy uh Ronald Richtor, German
um scientist set up a fusion project in
Baroloce.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. This is uh early 1950s, late 40s
into the early 50s. I believe in 1951,
the atomic energy a the IAEA,
international atomic energy agency
went down there to investigate claims
that they were developing nuclear fusion
and they found a very, you know, complex
facility over there.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, I've been there actually. I've
seen it. Little island off the off the
coast of Baraloce. It's like this little
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, you went to Baroce to investigate?
&gt;&gt; Not to investigate. Yes, I was hanging
out and I was on a hike and then
somebody told me about this scientist
named Ronald Richter who is this former
Nazi who was working on fusion there and
I was like what? And then I went and
it's amazing. So
&gt;&gt; yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And then there's a there's a
civilian nuclear grid in Baroce as well.
So who knows if there is some sort of
overlap there.
&gt;&gt; Well, Argentina later almost developed
nuclear weapons
&gt;&gt; later on in the 1970s. But here's the
interesting thing is that he promised to
develop these nuclear weapon fusion
fusion weapons for Peron and he never
did Ronald Rear.
&gt;&gt; And moreover, when the IAA people went
down there and investigated, they said,
"This doesn't look like any fusion that
we understand.
&gt;&gt; We don't know what this guy's doing down
here. It's incredibly energyintensive,
&gt;&gt; but it doesn't look like any kind of
fusion that we understand. Hm. Okay.
Here's where it gets really dark and and
and goes to your question of like if
they had all this technology, meaning
the Nazis, why didn't they use it to win
the war? And how is it that we won the
war? And so on so forth, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um there are some eyewitness reports
of two German nuclear weapons tests
being conducted between late 1944 and
early 1945.
one in the Baltic Sea where a pilot uh
was flying over the Baltic Sea and he
saw an exp a bright bright light that
almost blinded him and an explosion
where there were like multi-colored like
rainbow colored lights like fizzling
inside the explosion which is a telltale
sign of a nuclear fision explosion when
you see one with your naked eye in
person. It doesn't register on camera
very well, but it's like the rest of the
file material kind of like reacting
inside the mushroom cloud. And he said
like it it it created a huge pressure
wave he saw from his airplane and this
blinding flash of light and these weird
like multicolored reaction. And then
there's a second eyewitness account of
of um what appears to be a nuclear test
near the Thoringian forest
&gt;&gt; which I think they said like cut out
power in a nearby town or something like
this like you know the the EMP effect of
it.
So um again this is this is research
that's been done by two people. One is a
guy weird name uh Plimpmpton Hydrickch I
think
&gt;&gt; Plymouth or is it Plimpmpton? I got it
wrong when we spoke on the phone. It's
actually Plimpmpton, I think, Hydrickch.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; A book called Critical Mass.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; It's a whole study of the Nazi nuclear
program and its connection to the United
States and to the bombs we dropped on
Hiroshima Nagasaki, which we'll come to
in a minute.
&gt;&gt; And then the second source is Farrell's
uh deeper research on Plimpmpton
Hydrick's claims and additional research
that he did into Nazi nuclear weapons.
And basically the the picture that
emerges is this that the pro the uranium
enrichment program that um Heisenberg
was running was a red herring that was a
it was a uh basically cover and
diversionary tactic to throw off the
allies who successfully defeated that
program. They sent like
&gt;&gt; a team of like Nordic skiers or
something to like take out the heavy
water plant and so they they derailed
that project. uh but that there was a
deeper black project to develop nuclear
weapons using electromagnetic
isotope separation which is something
that later was used at Oakidge in the
United States
&gt;&gt; and that the Germans were using
electromagnetic isotope separation
in a in a more secret parallel track
program that did succeed in developing
fision weapons.
Now uh Plton Hydrickch in his book
argues he makes this case that at
Trinity they did not the records showed
that they did
&gt;&gt; when you say electromagnetic isotope
separations like just like a centrifuge
or or like
&gt;&gt; no something other than the kind of
centrifuge technology that we're used
to.
&gt;&gt; Um
and I you know I'm not a physicist I
don't know what it is. uh and and
probably they were also using laser
isotope enrichment because the Nazis
developed the laser I think in part for
this purpose of isotope enrichment
&gt;&gt; and which by the way just very brief
side note to all those people like
investigating the Iranian nuclear
program right now
&gt;&gt; they are not using centrifuge enrichment
for the nuclear weapons Iran has been
using laser isotope enrichment and I
hope that wherever the hell it is for
conducting laser isotope enrichment that
this regime doesn't have a an
unagnowledged stockpile of
highlyenriched uranium. In any case, be
that as amazing. The Shaw bought laser
isotope enrichment technology from
Switzerland in 1970.
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; Anyway, so so all this talk about, you
know, we got to check out the
centrifuges. That's not what they're
doing.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But okay, how is it relevant? It's they
learned from the Nazis. The Nazis had a
fake program which was a diversionary
tactic and then there was a real deeper
black program. Why would you use because
Heisenberg was so smart. I mean he was
responsible for you know understanding
the mathematical underpinnings behind
quantum leaps you know electrons and
electron shells and orbits and uh you
know the uncertainty princip.
&gt;&gt; He also wrote this book physics and
philosophy which is an absolutely
masterful text that quotes Heracitis and
shows how heracitis was like a precursor
to quantum theory and intuited basically
quantum theory. Is a fantastic book a
brilliant guy.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. is really it's a trippy book that
book because he talks about all sorts of
issues in quantum mechanics and
interpretations that you know the
Copenhagen school is kind of wrestling
with that we now kind of paint over with
this broad brush around consciousness
and he really like muses in this deep
way that consciousness might play a part
in wave function collapse and that sort
of thing and now it's just you know oh
you know it's it's all it's you know
it's it's the quantum detector or
whatever does you know wave the wave
function collapses particles collide or
whatever. But
&gt;&gt; so why would you why would you waste a
guy like that?
&gt;&gt; Waste a guy like that a brain like that?
&gt;&gt; Because if you want the allies to
believe
&gt;&gt; that this is your nuclear program,
you're going to have to put as your
frontman the guy that the allies would
expect to be running the Nazi nuclear
program. What's interesting about him is
he and all the people on his nuclear
program were captured like you said and
they were put I believe in the English
countryside and they the whole house was
wiretapped and this was a part of the uh
also program this you know nuclear tech
retrieval program and they were just
listen you know what what are they going
to say maybe they you know give away
some trade secrets and they talk about
feeling regret around working on the
nuclear program and also gratitude that
their sort of heavy water engine never
quite worked out which was I guess they
were using dutyium uh you know in their
approach. So
&gt;&gt; I thought you were going to say
something else because the other thing
I've heard about that I've heard the
story.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There's a transcript.
It's amazing. Read it out.
&gt;&gt; But here's an other interesting thing
about that. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Is that when the bombs were dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; They overheard these guys. They have
that, you know, transcript of how
immediately Heisenberg and his people
calculated the amount of file material
used.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, it was as if they knew like
they could reverse engineer from, you
know, the scale of the explosion,
whatever, what kind of bomb produced.
&gt;&gt; Whoa.
&gt;&gt; Which which implies a completed nuclear
weapon
&gt;&gt; or knowledge of one. But in any case,
that's
&gt;&gt; either that or they're the most
competent guys, which means they
shouldn't be on the cover program. I
wouldn't rest I wouldn't rest anything
on that. Um but here's here's the
interesting point I was uh making in
relation to the the uh Plimpmpton
Hydrick's research is that he says that
there's records showing the amount of
file material at Trinity and that it
wasn't anywhere close to being able to
um basically uh complete Fat Man and
Little Boy
&gt;&gt; and that in 1945
a deal was made with the Nazis to
transfer by submarine
the file material that went into the
bombs that we dropped on Hiroshima and
Nagasaki that the Trinity project was
completed
&gt;&gt; with Nazi highlyenriched uranium and
that it was transferred in an agreement
that we made with the SS.
&gt;&gt; Wow. Okay.
&gt;&gt; Your high conviction in that.
&gt;&gt; Well, this is what he argues and he's
done this, you know, his book is
critical mass. Yep. Okay. And he he lays
out a lot a huge argument for this.
&gt;&gt; Now, here's the problem.
if we got our uranium from them. And by
the way, he also makes the argument that
the engineering of the plutonium bomb
was completed with Nazi Nazi assistance.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So if we got our uh you know
uranium and additional technical
expertise for completing our nuclear
weapons from the Nazis and if there are
two reports uh of Nazi successful
nuclear tests in 44 and to 45
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Why weren't these weapons used by the
Nazis?
&gt;&gt; It's a great question. Why
&gt;&gt; there are a couple of different answers
and they're both really disturbing.
&gt;&gt; Okay,
let me start. I don't know which one is
more disturbing. Okay. But let Okay. So
if Ronald Richtor is working on fusion
in Argentina in 1950.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Is it possible and the Nazis had let's
say they've developed this bell that
involves electromagnetic torsion of
thorium and some kind of a plasma fusion
that takes place inside of this device.
&gt;&gt; is it possible the Nazis figured out
some other kind of nuclear reaction,
weaponizable nuclear reaction
&gt;&gt; besides fision?
&gt;&gt; And is that related to why Ronald
Richtor was promising fusion bombs
&gt;&gt; to Juan Peron, which he never delivered?
&gt;&gt; Interesting. I didn't know if he was
promising fusion.
&gt;&gt; He was promising nuclear weapons to and
this is why the IA went down there.
&gt;&gt; Fusion bombs.
&gt;&gt; Well, okay. He's working on fusion.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. and he's promising nuclear bombs to
Peron.
&gt;&gt; So we we may assume from those two data
points that he's promising fusion bombs.
&gt;&gt; Now we only developed fusion bombs
&gt;&gt; and hydrogen bombs are fusion bombs.
&gt;&gt; Exactly. But here's the interesting
thing is that we develop hydrogen fusion
bombs
&gt;&gt; in the ' 50s and this is 1950. Ronald
Richtor is down there. So it's
relatively the same ballpark time frame.
&gt;&gt; Edward Teller and Ulong that design was
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But here's the thing. Our hydrogen
bombs use a fision trigger
&gt;&gt; to create a fusion reaction.
&gt;&gt; What if the Nazis figured out how to
create a fusion reaction without a
fision trigger?
&gt;&gt; It would be extremely useful because the
radioactivity of a nuclear explosion
comes from the fision trigger. M
&gt;&gt; the neutron bombardment that well first
of all you know immediately disrupts
like a whole you know or our whole
organism and then also irradiates all
the fallout that comes down on people
&gt;&gt; that neutron bombardment is from the
fision reaction
&gt;&gt; not from the fusion.
&gt;&gt; So if you could create a fusion reaction
without a fision trigger you have a
clean nuclear bomb
&gt;&gt; an extremely high explosive force but no
radioactivity. So your troops could move
into that area and occupy it
immediately.
&gt;&gt; Really, there'd be no radioactivity.
&gt;&gt; No radioactivity. Straight. It's the
opposite of a neutron bomb. So a neutron
bomb is is, you know, engineered to
maximize neutron bombardment.
&gt;&gt; This is an autonic fusion bomb.
&gt;&gt; If the Nazis developed that in 1944 to
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; atom bombs would be like matches for
them.
&gt;&gt; It's child's play. M so they would be
willing to trade that for something else
like maybe the you know mass uh
assimulation and um what do you call it
amnesty for Nazi scientists like maybe
incorporation of their entire SS spy
network in Eastern Europe into the CIA
&gt;&gt; like perhaps the transfer of a huge
amount of funds wartime loot to
Argentina and other places
&gt;&gt; that they made a deal and gave the
matches to the Americans. They kept the
fusion bombs for themselves.
&gt;&gt; You don't think they'd just vaporize
large swaths of American territory and
try to win?
&gt;&gt; Now, this gives me this comes to the
second reason. Yeah. Okay. Which is even
more disturbing.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; All right.
&gt;&gt; And I I almost apologize for how
disturbing this is. No, but people need
to really think about this because I
think we're still inside this spider's
web and it's it's responsible for a lot
of the deception, misdirection uh around
the disclosure conversation today.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So, you have to take seriously this
claim on the part of the Nazi leadership
that they wanted a thousand year Reich.
Okay?
A thousand-year imperium is no joke.
Americans have a very hard time with
this because this country was born
yesterday in historical terms. Okay.
Uh there are other people who are
capable of grasping this more
effectively. Let me give you an example
and trust me it's it's worth setting it
up like this. And for context for the
audience real quick. Third Reich is
called that because I believe it was the
Roman Empire then the Holy Roman Empire
and they were supposed to be the third
instantiation.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So they want this thousand-y year Reich.
Okay. Well, who thinks like that? We in
Iran uh there was a dynasty that's often
misnamed the second Persian Empire.
Actually they weren't Persians, they
were schians. The Parthion Empire of
Iran. Okay. It lasted for 400 years. The
Parthion Empire Iran was the principal
rival of Rome. So the two superpowers in
the world at that time were the Roman
Empire and the Parthean Empire of Iran.
And at that time the country was called
Ariana Kashhatra, Aryan Imperium. That
was the official name of the Parthion
government was Aryan imperium and then
Ariana gets shortened to Iran in middle
Persian.
So these Parththeians ruled Iran and
successfully fought the Romans usually
to a stalemate for 400 years. Then they
get overthrown in a coup by these guys
called the Sassanids, the Sasanid
Persians and they establish their own
empire. But the Parthion elite
continue to be the backbone of the
Sasanid state. the feudal houses, the
Parthion feudal houses serve the
Sassanate state and protect it the way
like in Game of Thrones, you have all
the main houses in Game of Thrones and
they're like serving what's that place?
You know, the the the main the capital,
whatever it is, right?
&gt;&gt; Oh, uh
&gt;&gt; in Game of Thrones, what is that place?
&gt;&gt; I forget.
&gt;&gt; And the Lannisters are there and like
all the other feudal houses are serving
them, right?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So, get this. The Parththeians rule Iran
for 400 years directly.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. They continued to rule Iran
secretly for another 400 years under the
Sasanids. They're the backbone of the
Sassanid state. In the end, the
conflict, make a very long story short,
the conflict they had with the
&gt;&gt; Sassanids
&gt;&gt; results in the collapse of Iran to
Islam. The the state security of Iran
and the conquest of the Persian Empire
by the Mus Arab Muslim armies was on
account of basically the tension between
the Sassinets and these feudal lords. So
Iran then is subsumed by Islam for a
couple hundred years.
Round about 850 900 an Iranian
renaissance begins which is misnamed
often the Islamic golden age. 90% of the
people who contributed to it in the arts
and sciences were Iranians. Anyway,
the Parththeians are also the patrons of
this. So they become like the Medaches.
They become the patrons of an Iranian
renaissance for another 300 years
between like 900 between 900 and 1100.
Mhm. So these people ruled Iran directly
for 400 years, ruled Iran indirectly for
another 400 years, 800 years, and then
for another 300 years they patroned an
Iranian renaissance, 1100 years. For
over a thousand years, these feudal
families
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; had a coherent political vision.
&gt;&gt; That's how you need to think when you
want a thousand-y year Reich. Okay.
So, if the Nazis in the modern world
want to set up a thousand-year imperium,
it's going to require a little bit of
preparation,
&gt;&gt; investing a century in psychological
warfare and social engineering to set up
your thousand-year Reich is not at all
an unreasonable investment. M and so my
hypothesis is that from 1945 until 2045
we are in a period of preparation
involving horrendous psychological
warfare and social engineering by a
deeply entrenched fascist elite. Let's
not call them Nazis anymore because
they're really not nationalists. A
deeply entrenched fascist elite that
controls the American deep state.
So that's the an second answer to why
did they not win the war? No, they won
the war.
&gt;&gt; It's just you have to rethink what the
war is. The war is a anongs.
It's a worldview war.
&gt;&gt; And that doesn't mean what Americans
think it does. So like when we went into
Germany in 1945, the American military
went in there, they translated
Chong's into psychological warfare.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And then later became, you know, the
battle for hearts and minds, right?
psychological operations scops or
psychological warfare. That's not what
Chang's Greek means.
It means a war over the constitution of
the world from out of human
consciousness
&gt;&gt; on a social level. And it goes back to
German thinkers like Shelling Frederick
Shelling
&gt;&gt; and also ultimately Nietze definitely
Nichzche's idea of perspectival conflict
that
there's no unified god's eye perspective
on the world. There is of course you
know God is dead right I mean Nze is the
ultimate deconstructor of a theistic
monistic ontology. So there's no God to
have a perspective on the whole world
and there's nothing like a god's eye
perspective even in science and science
is always conditioned by culture and by
politics. So ontologically the world is
pluralistic. I mean William James also
made this point. He wrote a whole book
called a pluralistic universe which if
you look at the ontology of William
James' radical empiricism in his book a
pluralistic universe it almost
completely maps on to niche's
perspectival ontology
&gt;&gt; and I compared the two explicitly in
Prometheus and atlas.
&gt;&gt; So
you have this conflict of perspectives
that brings about the constitution of
what we consider to be the world.
Haidiger
uh beginning in being in time and and
going into his writings on technology he
calls this the worldhood of the world.
The what makes a world of meaning for
any people
is not the same
&gt;&gt; as how the warp and weft of meaning is
brought together by another people. So
there is a conflict of worlds over the
earth. Different worlds constituted by
let's say what Jung might call the
collective unconscious of a particular
people. And by the way this is a point
that's often
I don't know whether it's overlooked or
whether it's deliberately distorted in
readings of Jung is that Jung did not
believe in a single collective
unconscious. Jung believed in a racially
differentiated collective unconscious
and he's getting that idea from Hegel
and Hegel's philosophy of mind. Hegel
talks about the spirit of different
races and how it they the spirit of
different it sounds crazy but Hegel even
thinks that the spirit of different
races can shape the world geologically.
Okay, I don't know that Hyung would
certainly take it that far, but Hung
kind of got that idea from him and he
developed it to where like for example
he predicted that the spirit of Voton
would erupt from out of the collective
unconscious of the German people and it
did right in the form of the rise of the
Nazis in the second world war. So
Haidiger is saying that there's a war
and very much lines up again with NZE
there's a war of different worlds over
the earth.
So World War II is not what we think it
is. First of all, all the deep Nazi
thinkers did not see any difference
between World War I and World War II. If
you read, for example, Carl Schmidt, you
see this. You read Haidiger, you see
this. They say it's just the world war.
And the world war the world war the
Great War never ended for us. The Treaty
of Versailles was imposed on them. You
know, they considered themselves to be
like in a perpetual state of war for the
world.
And so you have to understand the term
world war in a different way. It's a
anongreek. It's a war over the way that
the world is going to show itself, is
going to come into presence, is going to
manifest.
It's it's a certain understanding of
what I've called in my writings
phenomenal authorization where I've
drawn a connection between three uh
different ideas, authorship,
authority, and authorization.
and tried to explain how phenomena
are authored and authorized
in how they can take shape and that
that's the most fundamental form of
sovereignty. That real authority is not
like the authority of a civilian
government that's elected or some
bureaucracy. It's who has the authority
to shape phenomena into a meaningful
world at a fundamental level.
And the people who developed
what uh Arosani was the master of in
Germany namely Changreek they understood
this.
So it's not bizarre for these people to
engage in a century of social
engineering to set up then what they
expect would be a thousand-y year
imperium. If they had dropped whatever
few nuclear weapons they had in 1944 on
American cities, I can tell you exactly
what the result would have been. Total
war against the German people on the
part of America. At the same time as
they're still fighting the Soviet Union,
right, who actually was the principal
enemy of Nazi Germany, responsible for
most of the deaths in Europe, the
Soviets are really the ones who defeated
the Germans to be honest. Okay.
&gt;&gt; And so here they've got Stalin coming at
them from one direction. Now they're
dropping nukes on uh their fellow
Germanic, you know, eur fellow European
Americans. Now they're going to get the
Americans, you know, interested in total
war to annihilate them. Americans were
also developing nuclear weapons.
Best case scenario,
I guarantee you, Jesse, they would not
have ruled the world for more than two
generations.
Even if they had succeeded in defeat,
militarily defeating America, there
would have been a massive insurgency
against them, the amount of arms that
Americans possess personally, right? And
then the amount of uh communist
revolutionary fervor in Europe being
backed by the Soviet Union, they would
have faced a massive insurgency. But is
it is the implication that there's some
sort of Nazi sleeper cell undergirling
American politics today or
&gt;&gt; fascist is a better way to to put it?
Fascist. fascist because Naz and now
here's another point. The neo-Nazis hate
this.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; These people aren't nationalists. So
Nazi is a misnomer Borman is not a
nationalist. Autoscoran is not a
nationalist. These people created first
of all to begin with they weren't
nationalists. They were looking for a
kind of global imperium. Okay. They used
nationalism and they you they used crass
populism
to create a power base for themselves.
But you can see from how they're
operating, especially after the war from
45 onward, that they're very much
internationalists. They have a global
vision.
&gt;&gt; So, but they're fascists. And do I think
that there's a fascist underbelly to
America? Absolutely. I think that's the
deepest substratum of the deep state
that controls these black projects is
absolutely fascist.
&gt;&gt; Now,
&gt;&gt; but but it was it was a nationalist
move. I you had Vagner was very popular
Bismar and you had this resuscitation of
all this kind of German national pride
free
&gt;&gt; remember what we were saying about
monumental history earlier
&gt;&gt; you need to monumentalize history
&gt;&gt; if you want a a substantive forward
development
&gt;&gt; so if you want to create a thousand-year
Reich
&gt;&gt; you need a lot of cultural material for
that
&gt;&gt; but I would hardly say that at least
among the leadership of this movement
that there were sort of like
xenophob phobically German. No, they
they loved all kind of European
civilizational heritage and they were
interested in the Aryan, you know,
heritage of places like Iran and India
as well. They even sent people to Tibet
to like get the Tibetan scriptures. Yep.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; they sent them to Mount Kyash and they
were looking for the holy grail.
&gt;&gt; They were interested. They had a very
broad and deep conception of what they
considered the Aryan heritage. Okay. It
was not nationalistically German. They
used the German nationalism to rile up
masses and build a power base.
&gt;&gt; So do you think there was some Nazi
nonhuman intelligence or alien
connection going? I mean this guy Peter
Leenda for example who writes a book
called the the unholy alliance where he
talks about we talked about last time
Nordic alien beings. Do you think that
there was some sort of alliance between
them and and the Nazis? Because I guess
that sounds quacky, but I'm almost even
more likely to believe that than the
idea that the Nazis writ large just
threw their lot in with the US and sort
of stopped fighting and made some, you
know, really long time horizon
calculated decision to perpetuate the
Third Reich through some sort of subrosa
ruling of their greatest adversary. Like
I just I think
&gt;&gt; No, I agree with you. You know, I agree
with you.
&gt;&gt; The the the the regime that would do
that wouldn't fail and and fight a two-f
frontont war with with Russia and then,
you know, destroy themselves, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, they're not mutually
exclusive.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Do I think that they were in contact on
some level with people
who they knew would in some way affirm
and complete this project. they were
taking a great risk
&gt;&gt; to forward. Yes, I think so. And there
we need to look at these claims about
the ver society and the fool society.
So there are these claims that there was
a group of mediums
I think mostly women
who were engaging in telepathic
communication with basically a group of
supermen.
uh and that the these supermen were sort
of helping these oultists with both like
geopolitical machinations and scientific
breakthroughs.
I haven't been able to find any evidence
of an independently existing VR society.
&gt;&gt; But there was a thool society
&gt;&gt; and the concept of VR was very important
to the thu society. M
&gt;&gt; VR is this uh idea that um uh Sir Edward
Bullwward Littton wrote a book about in
1871 I believe the coming race.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And by the way this guy's
biography is insane. You should What's
his deal?
&gt;&gt; Look at Edward Bulward Littton. At one
point he was offered the crown of Greece
and he declined it.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. They offered he was a British
gentleman. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; British aristocrat. Super aristocrat.
&gt;&gt; Extremely aerodite guy. Obviously deep
into the oult.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And traveled around a lot. And at one
point they wanted to make him king of
Greece and he was like, "No, man. I
don't want the trouble." Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And this book he wrote, The Coming Race,
Hitler was, I think, really into. And it
was this book about like an underground
civilization or something. Was this
based on any sort of empirical evidence
was from him, you know, in his journeys
or whatever? Did he happen upon these
people or something?
&gt;&gt; I don't One can speculate, right?
&gt;&gt; One can speculate that that might have
been the case. Um, but
&gt;&gt; in any case, the Thy took all this very
seriously. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And the Thu Society, oddly enough, it
was founded by this guy Baron Rudolfph
vonorf
&gt;&gt; who was initiated in Kurdistan of all
places.
&gt;&gt; He was initiated into an ancient Iranian
Kurdish order called Alelak
&gt;&gt; who are basically like surviving miths.
Anyway, long story short, he comes back
from Kurdistan
uh through Turkey and he creates this
stool gazelle chef. Now, what is stool?
Thu is the Germanic conception of
Atlantis.
&gt;&gt; It's an island continent where a super
civilization existed in vast antiquity
which the these people the thug of
gazelle shaft believed were the
progenitors of the Aryan race.
&gt;&gt; And by the way they didn't make this up.
Helena Blovski has this in her
theosophical writings that
&gt;&gt; the Aryan race came from Atlantis. I
mean this is one of the claims that you
know she makes. And I believe that on
some level Steiner accepted it also.
Although Steiner had a much more
metaphysical transcendental
interpretation of what Atlantis was.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, he I mean I think he
believed it existed. And then Rudolph
Hess who was in Hitler's inner circle
was a huge fan of Rudolph Steiner as
well. So
&gt;&gt; yes, and then the Nazis eventually
considered Steiner to be their principal
adversary, which is saying a lot because
when you consider somebody your your
nemesis, it means that in a way actually
you're fighting over the same thing.
&gt;&gt; I didn't know that. you're fighting over
the Oh, they burned down the Gothna. The
Nazis burned down the first Gothna
because they thought that anthroposphe
could really become a rival to Nazism
&gt;&gt; and to their vision for Europe and the
destiny of the world and so forth.
Fascinating.
&gt;&gt; So, which you know it says a lot. In any
case, um, the Thu Society was obsessed
with Atlantis
&gt;&gt; and excavating the Atlantean heritage of
the Aryans, including the Germans, and
essentially of creating a new Atlantis.
Now, where would this island continent
be? Which, by the way, they associate
the Ger Germans associate with ice and a
frozen overplace. And some Germans
believed that it was the same place as
Hyperoreia. and some of them did.
&gt;&gt; So if you look back at Plato's Tmus and
Critius
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; and uh you know read every one of the
clues he gives us about where Atlantis
was located.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; He says it is an island continent
the size of Libya and Asia combined
which in the geography of the Greeks of
his time meant a land mass the size of
the Persian Empire.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's a big island.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Okay. That's that's like the con
size of the continental United States.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Then he says that it's in the world
ocean.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And that from Atlantis you can by going
to Atlantis you can cross over from one
side of the world to the other side of
the world.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; And it's in the world ocean.
&gt;&gt; Oh wow.
&gt;&gt; Well we have a world ocean. It's where
the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean,
and the Indian Ocean meet in the
coastline of Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And it is an island the size of
Libya and Asia combined as you put it or
size of continental United States.
&gt;&gt; And you can get to the other side of the
world from it. You island hop through
Antarctica. You can get from Africa to
South America or you know
&gt;&gt; Y and uh he also says that there's huge
mountain ranges there.
So, and then one other thing
&gt;&gt; and it was destroyed by a great flood
and it might have had sort of very
livable conditions pre younger dus
period and ice age you know alla Graham
Hancock and Randle Carlson's work um and
so literally you know Atlantis was you
know destroyed in this great flood and
it's it's dated back they say this was
9,000 in that mythos festival tomus and
creteus that's 600 BC and they say this
was 9,000 years ago and that's 9 9,600
BC which is literally the end of the ice
age and this flood which ended the ice
age was called meltwater pulse 1b. So
&gt;&gt; yes and I think the mechanism for that.
So the dates match perfectly and I think
the mechanism for that was convincingly
argued by um Charles Hapgood. M
&gt;&gt; uh Charles Hapgood was a um scientist
who worked I think at no was it may no
he might have been a historian actually
he worked at uh Boston University I
believe but he also was working on
contract for the CIA
&gt;&gt; and uh he came up with this theory
called earth custal displacement
&gt;&gt; where periodically the this is to really
you know dumb it down but periodically
the earth would become topheavy due to
glaciation. Mhm. And um this would cause
the
uh crust of the earth to slip over the
mantle by a few thousand km
and that pulls the ice out of the polar
regions
&gt;&gt; and the ice then precipitously melts.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So
this this notion that North America was
covered by ice during the ice age
uh and that some and that North America
was where it currently is but it was
just covered by ice is facious according
to Hapkut. It's that the North Pole was
where Hudson Bay is today.
&gt;&gt; And the reason North America was
glaciated was because it was a lot
closer to the North Pole. A lot more of
it was closer to the North Pole. And uh
by the same token at that time
Antarctica was where Argentina would be
today.
&gt;&gt; So Atlantis would have had the climate
of contemporary Argentina.
&gt;&gt; And I believe in the Piri Ree map which
was found in Turkey that's exactly what
it looks like. It looks like Antarctica
has sort of shifted and this is supposed
to be some sort of you know pre ice age
map. Not only that, those maps, at least
one of them, I don't remember whether
it's the Pirises or the Orontius Fineas
map, but one of them shows that
Antarctica actually consists of two
islands that are very close together.
&gt;&gt; And um and this is in fact the case. Our
subglacial topography has shown that
it's not one land mass. It's two islands
that are very close together.
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So clearly
&gt;&gt; that also lends to its accuracy.
&gt;&gt; Totally. And so whoever knew whoever
made those maps originally and they may
have been copied in the library of
Alexandria
whoever made the initial maps that have
correct longitude and latitude on them
also which we didn't have at that time.
&gt;&gt; The also the conspiracy about Pirase is
that it uh the map looks like it shows
the curvature of the earth.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And this is well before Columbus.
&gt;&gt; Yes. So I think that those were copied
from Atlantan maps at some point.
&gt;&gt; Copied and recopied many times. Anyway,
so the Nazis are looking for Atlantis,
the Thu Gazelle Shaftis, right? The Thu
society
and Thu is their Atlant. And by the way,
one little interesting point there is
that
the Mayans
have, you know, the Mayans have legends
of Atlantis. They have legends of a a
great island, great island continent
that was decimated by a flood and that
its survivors took refuge there. There
there is this legend among the Mayans
which I believe Graham Hanok among
others has cited in his work
and they have these two words that they
use for that place. One is
&gt;&gt; Atlan
&gt;&gt; and the other is Tulon.
&gt;&gt; Tulon sounds a lot like tul.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Tulon, right? Tulon atlan. So it could
be the same word even ultimately or
derived from the same word. Anyway,
uh, guess what the Nazis wind up doing
in 193738?
Deutsch Antarctic Expedition.
&gt;&gt; They send a ton of personnel down there.
&gt;&gt; They even fly over the Trans Antarctic
Mountains and drop swastika flags all
over the landscape with like spears. Why
do why do you think they went?
&gt;&gt; Because they figured out that this is
Thu,
&gt;&gt; that this is Atlantis. The nominal
reason too which is so primaacia just
absurd is I think they said that they
were going because of butter rations and
like Antarctica was you know a source of
margarine or something so go explore it
penguins.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, exactly.
&gt;&gt; Hess and the penguins.
&gt;&gt; It's not even like a charismatic cover
story like it's you know that seems so
patently ridiculous.
&gt;&gt; You know there's a book called Hess and
the Penguins.
&gt;&gt; Oh, I didn't know that. Hess and the
Penguin. Oh yeah. Like like Herman Hess.
&gt;&gt; No.
So, one of the main guys they send to
Antarctica is Rudolph Hess.
&gt;&gt; Oh, Rudolph Hess.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And this Rudolph Hess who they
send to Antarctica
a few years later
takes a secret unauthorized flight out
of Germany
lands in Britain in a field
is uh met by British officers and he
says I have orders to meet with Winston
Churchill. What? And they go to
Churchill and they say, "Sir, is a Hess
is here." Like, you know, he flew up on
an unauthorized flight here. And
Churchill said, "I don't want to see
him. Throw him in prison. We're gonna
interrogate him." So then they
interrogate Hess and he says
he had orders to secretly come to
Britain and make a not just a peace
overture but an alliance proposal to 30
members of the British Parliament who
were favorable toward Hitler.
So at at this point when Hess had made
this flight, I believe Hitler had made
three peace offers to the British,
&gt;&gt; including an offer to ally together and
to have basically the British Royal Navy
and the Nazis become collaborators on a
global scale. And so this was the final
peace offering before the outbreak of
hostilities.
And who do they send the guy who was in
Antarctica?
&gt;&gt; What's the significance?
&gt;&gt; Well, then here's the other thing. After
the war,
he was he remained in prison. They kept
him in prison. So this guy didn't
participate in the brunt of World War
II. He was put in prison before
hostilities break out with the British.
They keep him in prison and then they
send him to West Germany where he winds
up imprisoned to the day he dies and no
one's allowed to talk to him. They
quarantine him. Rudolfph S. Number one,
why keep him in prison? What did he do?
I mean, you know, he went to Antarctica,
came back, tried to make peace with the
British. This guy wasn't involved in the
hostilities. Why? Why even put him in
prison? Number two, why quarantine him
and not allow people to talk to him and
keep him there until the day he dies?
What did Hes know? What did he see in
Antarctica? What did he want to tell the
British?
That's an interesting question.
&gt;&gt; What do you think?
&gt;&gt; Uh, about Atlantis.
&gt;&gt; You think so?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I think that they got there and
they they came there with the express
purpose
of excavating what is there, what they
believe to be there and I think they
found it.
&gt;&gt; And um there's a very interesting story
that was told to Linda Molton How by an
Navy Seal
&gt;&gt; who claimed to have uh been tasked with
a mission in Antarctica. And he said
that not far from McMmero,
they discovered
a a huge like like
I don't want to make up a number. It was
very large uh black stone octagonal
highly polished black stone octagonal
structure sticking out like 18 ft above
the ice.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And they found the doorway to this thing
and the doorway was like 20 ft by like
20 ft. and it slid open to reveal this
octagonal huge chamber that uh was
illuminated. It wasn't clear from what
light source with this pale greenish
hue. And they started to investigate and
they found that this complex consisted
of one octagon underneath another.
Oh, very important point. The door to
the facility had a schwartza inscribed
on it etched perfectly into this
polished black stone.
&gt;&gt; What is that?
&gt;&gt; Was the black sun symbol that the SS had
put on the floor of the main meeting
hall in Belesburg Castle where the
highest order of SS knights would meet
&gt;&gt; led by Himmler. So that same symbol
according to this Navy seal was on the
door to this octagonal facility. and
they went and explored it and they said
it was octagon underneath Octagon until
the last lower level of it
opened into
um antidolivian ruins into like vastly
ancient megalithic structures that were
trapped by the ice
&gt;&gt; deep underneath the ice. So, it's like
something that was built there to give
access
&gt;&gt; to this, you know, these, I don't know,
the ruins of Atlantis, whatever.
&gt;&gt; And I think the Navy Seal also said that
they found another way to get down there
to the bottom of this, you know, pancake
octagonal structure by taking submarines
under the ice, US submarines. They found
another way around to get to the same
point and surface the sub inside this
pocket where like the octagonal
structure met the ruins that are trapped
in ice.
&gt;&gt; So that's an interesting date. Now you
know Linda Moltonhow has been fed this
information by various people like
Richard Dodie and so forth. So so who
knows like whether this account from
this Navy Seal is is more disinfo or
not.
&gt;&gt; Are there any other corroborating
stories?
&gt;&gt; Well there's Operation High Jump.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. So in 1946, for whatever reason,
we United States Navy sent a huge
expedition of ships to Antarctica. Mhm.
And it's worthy of note that this
happened immediately after we
intercepted Nazi submarine traffic going
uh to Argentina, right around Patagonia.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Okay.
So, we intercept these German submarines
and then operation high jump is fielded
and Admiral Bird goes down there with a
huge contingent and they're supposed to
be there for months studying Antarctica
or whatever and they come back in very
short order, badly damaged, many ships
lost and personnel lost
to whatever catastrophe. It's not
entirely clear. I mean they blamed it on
weather conditions
and there are these stories that
I mean there are literally stories like
press clippings
that when uh Admiral Bird stopped at
Chile I don't know if it was Santiago
some somewhere in Chile on the way back
to the United States at a port in Chile
he gave a statement to the Chilean press
saying that we needed to prepare
for a third World War in which aircraft
could cross from pole to pole at
tremendous speeds.
&gt;&gt; So there's that.
&gt;&gt; Um and then he was debriefed in
Washington and never spoke about it
again.
&gt;&gt; And then I believe his direct boss, a
guy named James Foresttoall, who was
Secretary of the Navy, then became
Secretary of Defense, committed suicide
in this sort of weird fashion. I mean,
&gt;&gt; suicide my ass. They threw him out a
window.
&gt;&gt; They threw him out of a window. Yeah.
Exactly.
Um yeah,
&gt;&gt; first they sent him to like what was it
like mental health health
hospitalization or something?
&gt;&gt; He was a naval hospital in Bethesda,
Maryland. And he was actually um
reciting or he was he was writing um the
uh Sophocles poem or whatever and he's
like mid-sentence and um his brother had
just seen him the day before and said
that he was totally fine and of sad mind
and then they found his bathrobe tied to
the radiator and he had jumped out the
window or whatever. The whole thing was
sort of like really inexplicable and
weird. Um
&gt;&gt; I think they killed him.
&gt;&gt; Do you think it was related to the
Admiral Bird stuff?
&gt;&gt; It was related to the bird. It was
related to basically the creation of the
national security state
through the the integration of American
military intelligence and industrial
structure with the remnants of Nazi
Germany.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. And then do you think are
there any other corroborating facts
around Antarctica possibly being this
kind of Atlantean bastion? I mean is the
idea that like there is some sort of
like Atlantean surviving remnant group
that's still there. I mean it is
interesting that Antarctica is a a
no-fly zone as of 1957 the international
geohysical year.
There have been skiers who have uh, you
know, were putitively exploring
Antarctica for sport
who have had black helicopters descend
on them and they were told that they are
um in an area that affects the national
security of the United States and that
they're going to be immediately
evacuated.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And now there shouldn't be an area
that affects the national security of
the United States legally because
according to the Antarctic Treaty,
Antarctica is like a
&gt;&gt; neutral
&gt;&gt; neutral zone. Yeah. Right.
&gt;&gt; Um
I do suspect
that
the principal subterranean
submarine
location for these Nordics who we
discussed in our first conversation is
Antarctica. That's what I suspect
&gt;&gt; that if the Atlantean civilization was
destroyed there by some precipitous
flooding and you know Antarctica being
pulled into the southern polar region so
that it froze over. Oh, I'll tell you
another interesting corroborating piece
of evidence in a minute. So that it
froze over. Look, if we're dealing with
this super advanced civilization that
had like ZPE, you know, propulsion,
of course they had underground
facilities. You know, Antarctica is full
of mountains. It has mountains arrival
of the Himalayas. Those people would
have buil built facilities inside
mountains and underground.
Those facilities would have survived. So
there would have been Atlanteans who
survived in these facilities.
&gt;&gt; I think it's even speculated now by
climate scientists and geoysicists that
there could be subterranean parts of
Antarctica with pretty warm climates.
&gt;&gt; Ah, that's huge thermal vent.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. That's fascinating. I I also think
um Richard Bird, Admiral Richard Bird
talked about uh pyramid and the pyramid
you can spot like I have a friend who
went down there and I think he was
making a documentary or something and he
saw this sort of black pyramid.
&gt;&gt; There's a picture of it. I've seen a
picture of it.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And it was on Google
Maps and then I think it got deleted off
Google Maps or something. This big
scandal.
&gt;&gt; Um but like you know I have a friend
who's like not into UFOs at all and like
went down to Antarctica
&gt;&gt; and he can see it. He saw
&gt;&gt; he could see this thing. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So, it's like a real thing.
Um, so I don't know. It's interesting.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Now, the other thing I was going to
tell you is corroborative of this
&gt;&gt; is that, and we we got into this just a
little bit in our first conversation,
the flood myths.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right.
&gt;&gt; So, there's a version of the Noah's
flood story in every culture on Earth.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Which uh makes it pretty certain
that it happened.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
There's only one myth that's different.
It's the same event, but it's a
different type of story. That's the
Iranian version.
&gt;&gt; So in the Iranian version, which is
preserved in the Avesta, the ancient
Iranian scriptures
originally, Mithraic and then Zorastrian
scriptures,
it says that the Iranian people, which
you have to understand like when they're
using the ter they're using term Aryan
people, you know, like I said in the
Parthion period and before the country
was called Arono. So in the Avesta it
says that the the you know Arian the
Aryan people
uh come from an island continent at the
center of the world which froze over
&gt;&gt; froze over.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; That it was basically ice came and
engulfed it.
&gt;&gt; Which is like a tsunami that then
freezes.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So all the cultures all around the
world have flood myths, but this one
culture says that we come from an island
continent which froze over
&gt;&gt; and it's at the center of the world.
Well, if you
&gt;&gt; you know where you consider the center
of the world is arbitrary. If you're
living in Antarctica and you notice by
the way that all the other continents
are distributed around you, like Plato
said, it's center of the world ocean,
you're liable to consider yourself the
center of the world.
&gt;&gt; Sure. And one other interesting point in
that regard is that
although the majority of Antarctica
prior to this, you know, um, younger
dusk catastrophe,
&gt;&gt; although the majority of Antarctica
would have been where Argentina is
today, part of it was already in the
southern polar region.
&gt;&gt; So it would have been a place like
Patagonia where there there was a place
on Atlantis where you come up against
the ice sheet.
&gt;&gt; Right? Now, that's interesting because
uh center of the world like it could
also be taken to mean like the north of
the world or the pole of the world. And
in fact, in Iranian esotericism, they do
say this about this place that it was
the pole of the world.
&gt;&gt; Uh the north and south poles of the
world flip magnetically
&gt;&gt; at various intervals, long intervals,
&gt;&gt; but not that long. If we
&gt;&gt; say it's like 9,000 years or
&gt;&gt; I think it's longer than that. I think
it's longer than that. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; But you know Edar Casey now you know
that's a whole rabbit hole but you know
various mediums have have looked at
Atlantis and have said things about
Atlantis and they describe a
civilization that went on for tens of
thousands of years which then was
brought to this catastrophic end about
12,000 years ago. Right.
&gt;&gt; Now, if Atlantis existed for tens of
thousands of years, was a thriving
civilization for that long a period of
time,
it would have been when Antarctica was
the north pole of the world,
&gt;&gt; the northern magnetic pole.
&gt;&gt; So when people talk about hyperoreia,
the land at the north of the world, and
the Germanic people, the Germanic people
on the th gazelle shaft say that
ultimula was the northern continent.
It fits with when the magnetic pole was
in Antarctica and when part of
Antarctica was already in the pole, but
most of it was where Argentina is today.
&gt;&gt; So all of that somehow I think is
corroborative.
&gt;&gt; Very interesting. You do have like a lot
of very high netw worth people going
down there occasionally. Bill Gates
likes to go down there.
I have no idea. He's probably not
communing with aliens or something, but
it that is interesting. There's a lot of
kind of u very wealthy tourism.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I think we're going to find
out what's what's there.
&gt;&gt; You do?
&gt;&gt; Yes. Very soon, unfortunately.
&gt;&gt; Why?
&gt;&gt; So, a number of remote viewers have
remote viewed the year 2050.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; One group was led by Stefan Schwarz
and uh Lin Buchanan also did the same
project of remote viewing the world in
and other people as well, but these are
two very prominent ones.
And they all say that there's going to
be a catastrophic precipitous sea level
rise.
&gt;&gt; Not the kind of sea level rise you
expect like a few feet from global
warming or whatever, climate change. No,
no, no.
&gt;&gt; And not just a tsunami like you would
expect. Another thing that Lynn has
talked about is Comraviea exploding
&gt;&gt; on Los Palmus
&gt;&gt; and uh you know the flank of that
volcanic mountain collapsing into the
Atlantic Ocean which then would create a
tsunami that would batter the east coast
of the United States, right? And he
thinks that that may happen at some
point.
&gt;&gt; And by the way, when it was going off, I
was in communication with him being
like, "Lynn, do you think this is it?
Like, should I leave New York? I was in
New York." And he's like, you know, I'd
say 50/50. You know, you should get your
ass out of there. It's like a coin flip
coin toss at this point.
&gt;&gt; Anyway, um
but not like a tsunami, okay? Permanent
sea level rise
&gt;&gt; of between two to 300 ft.
&gt;&gt; Meaning every coastal city in the world
is going to go underwater by 2050. Every
coastal city in the world. That would
affect about 4 billion people.
&gt;&gt; But I don't know. There are all these
predictions in UFO space around 2027.
I'm just telling you the remote viewers
all see this. They see
&gt;&gt; that all the coastal areas of the world
have gone deep underwater.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; You know what would have to happen for
that to be the case?
&gt;&gt; The Antarctic ice sheet has to melt.
&gt;&gt; Sure.
&gt;&gt; Completely.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Completely. Which means two things.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. uh one it means that there's some
massive event that you know high energy
of something whatever that causes that
or a geohysical event of the kind that
took place 12,000 years ago. In other
words, another crustal slippage.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That pulls Antarctica back out of the
southern polar region. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And then it melts precipitously.
&gt;&gt; Or an asteroid.
&gt;&gt; Or an asteroid could hit Antarctica and
melt the ice sheet all at once. Break it
up into ice cubes and then melt it
quickly.
&gt;&gt; So, or who knows? I mean, what? Like, I
hope nobody's storing fusion bombs in
Antarctica.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; Well, there's that guy there's the Eric
Hecker guy who says that um there are
like nutrino detectors and emitters on
the South Pole that Rathon in the US and
aerospace primes are, you know, uh
running and that that even caused the
Christ Church earthquake in New Zealand.
And I I don't know what to make of him.
He's a very odd character. I invited him
on my show and he got kind of squirly
and fell off.
&gt;&gt; I do think tectonic weaponry exists. I
do think tectonic weaponry exists. I
mean, Nicola Tesla describes having used
tectonic weaponry in his laboratory. He
caused an earthquake in Manhattan. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The police broke down his door.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; You know, and they had to take a
sledgehammer to the thing. Well, that
some people have this conspiracy that
Tesla, the Tangusa 1908 Siberia asteroid
impact was actually just a Tesla death
weapon that was being tested near the
North Pole. I don't know if you've ever
heard that. certainly have heard it. But
you know, I heard an even more
interesting explanation of Tongosko,
which fits with what we've been
discussing and what we discussed in our
last conversation
&gt;&gt; cuz the conventional or I don't know if
it's a conventional explanation, but the
Graham Hancock explanation is that it's
a comet air burst from the torid meteor
stream and that's that's explains the
impact with the local trees and the
crater and that sort of thing. But yeah,
what do you think? So, one of the remote
viewers trying to remember which one it
was, but I I can't remember right now
which one. It was one of the prominent
people who worked on Stargate and Grill
Flame, not like some cook.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay. It was one of the primary remote
viewers.
I almost want to say it might have been
Joe McMonle, but I can't remember
exactly which one it was. Anyway, he
said he remote viewed the Tonguska
explosion.
&gt;&gt; And get this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; He says it was um uh people in a saucer.
people
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; in a saucer.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Who were escaping the civilization they
come from
&gt;&gt; because it was a totalitarian oppressive
place and they wanted to leave and they
didn't know that there was an explosive
timer on the thing so that not a timer
an altitudebased explosive device so
that if they came down below a certain
altitude the thing was going to
detonate.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And so it had been like pre
pre-mined with an explosive that they
weren't aware was on board. And then
they found out about it. And he says
they went around the planet a few times
like trying to figure out what what are
we going to do? Like we can't go down.
&gt;&gt; And finally they went down and they
exploded. And that's what caused the
Tongaska blast. This is what he claimed.
&gt;&gt; I tell you why I find that story
interesting.
because a remote viewer who I had
personal contact with, another, you
know, military intelligence guy, uh,
I'll just tell you who it is who cares,
&gt;&gt; Lind Buchanan.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Um, when we were having some
conversations at his home, he told, and
what I'm about to tell you is very
relevant to to all of this in in a very
like gravely
political way.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
He said that he was confronted at a
diner that he eats at regularly
by three men. It's funny, these stories
often involve three men encounter with
three men.
&gt;&gt; Three men who purported to be from this
Nordic civilization.
And he said that there are rebels among
them.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. who consider the society that they
come from to be an oppressive
totalitarian
hierarchy.
And he said that there's something like
the Underground Railroad like like you
know that um trans that facilitated the
liberation of black slaves from the
south into the north during the Civil
War
&gt;&gt; that there's a system that they compared
to the Underground Railroad
&gt;&gt; to facilitate
uh these Nordic rebels taking refuge in
America in particular.
so that their children and grandchildren
could enjoy the liberties of our society
and escape their oppressive totalitarian
system. And he said in particular, a lot
of them live in the Colorado Rockies and
small towns in the Colorado Rockies. Of
course,
&gt;&gt; he said this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; He said these men told him this.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Listen to the rest of this. So he
So he said they they live in like small
towns in the Rockies and they they pass
because they're they look like tall
Scandinavian people.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. I imagine a lot of their kids are
on the basketball team. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And so he said, "Look, we know that Kit
Green at the CIA has some program to
access the 23 and me and like whatever
ancestry.com
databases through some backdoor and that
they are screening the entire whoever
signs up for these services for a
specific genetic variance from the
normal homo sapiens population which the
CIA knows supposed to be the genetic
marker of these Nordics.
&gt;&gt; And they said, "Look, our our children,
especially our grandchildren, have no
idea where they're from. We tell them
stories about how like their
grandparents are from Sweden or
whatever, and they don't know, you know,
we just want them to have lives of peace
and liberty here in America.
Uh, but the CIA wants to hunt them down.
and would you and this was why they met
with Lynn. They said would you please go
back to these people and tell them we
are not trying to take over your
government. We just want to live here in
peace and to please leave our children
alone. Okay. And so this is a story that
he told me and um and what I said to him
was look if these people next time it
was very interesting he said two of them
sat down with him and one of them stood
next to the diner booth as if like he
was not just on the lookout but as if he
was like creating some kind of a shield
around the conversation.
And so I said to Lynn, uh, if these
people come back next time, could you
please tell them that instead of, you
know, selfishly seeking a life of
peace and comfort and liberties for
their children, they should help us to
carry out some kind of a coup against
this fascist deep state that we have in
this country. Because if they don't help
us do that, soon these liberties that
they came here for aren't going to exist
anymore and they're going to be living
back under the system that they escaped
from. So, you know, they should get in
touch and there should be some kind of a
coordination to, you know, work on the
American deep state together so that,
you know, this kind of a system that
they want to to want to benefit from
continues to exist.
&gt;&gt; How's that effort going?
&gt;&gt; Uh-huh. Crickets.
&gt;&gt; Uh-huh.
Interesting. Well, I've I anecdotally
I've heard some very interesting and
weird stories around
Nordic looking people in the Rockies.
So,
&gt;&gt; I have too. I have too from other people
like
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; It's interesting.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Um, so do you think that this like Okay,
so let's just We're in crazy territory
right now, but do you think, you know,
if if these Atlantean survivors are
camped out in Antarctica now, what do
you think they want with mankind? Do you
think if there was any relationship
between them and the Nazis?
&gt;&gt; 100%. And
&gt;&gt; so were they trying to sort of
imminentize the escaton kind of the Eric
Voglin like you know they were trying to
bring about some sort of apocalypse or
like what do they want? Like why would
they? I mean you would assume they're
kind of nefarious if they are partnering
with the Nazis. Um or are they good or
is it like way more complicated than
that? And good and bad are just like
human constructs that we're trying to
apply to a a paradigm we don't
understand.
What do you think their intent is?
&gt;&gt; It's an arubaros.
&gt;&gt; What is that?
&gt;&gt; It's the snake that's biting its own
tail. That alchemical symbol of the
snake that's biting its own tail.
&gt;&gt; The biggest problem, and I saw this in
some of the comments, you know, in
response to our first conversation, the
biggest problem that people have with
with wrapping their minds around this is
the element of time.
&gt;&gt; If we're dealing with a timetraing
civilization,
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
It means they have a hyperdimensional
relationship to human history.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So if you I mean all these people have
these weird taxonomies of 43 different
alien species and 10 different kinds of
Nordics and the tall whites and Charles
Hall talks about the tall whites and he
talks about the Norwegians with 23
teeth.
Yeah. Okay.
&gt;&gt; That was the most insane interview I've
ever done. I don't know what to make of
it.
&gt;&gt; Here here's the problem.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Just let's look at it on a
conceptual level.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Leave out the aliens for a minute.
Just let's look at time travel on a
conceptual level.
If you have this scientific breakthrough
&gt;&gt; to where you can engineer time machines
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; from that moment forward
at any point in the future, you could
travel to any point in the past.
&gt;&gt; Right?
So if some group of Nordics,
whether it's literally the Nazis,
&gt;&gt; or whether it's a group of people with a
Nordic phenotype,
&gt;&gt; at some other point in history, maybe an
Atlantis,
&gt;&gt; maybe 100 years into the future,
some group of people with a Nordic
phenotype,
cracks time travel. That means that
there are Nordics 10,000 years in our
past coming from a hundred years in our
future. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; It means there are Nordics a 100 years
in our past coming from 10,000 years in
our future.
&gt;&gt; It means there are Nordics walking
around here today that come from a
million years into the future presuming
they're able to survive for that long.
Right?
So the differences in physioamy that we
see between let's say whatever the tall
whites or let's say the Nordics who
could pass for Swedes may simply be
differences in evolutionary biology
having to do with very long stretches of
time
&gt;&gt; that we're seeing different phases of
the same civilization. Now that
civilization may also have fractured
&gt;&gt; like like Azimov's foundation right you
know where humanity's expanded into the
cosmos and you know colonized thousands
of planets and so the civilization may
have bifurcated or triated or whatever
okay and we may be seeing
different uh phases in its evolutionary
biological development
&gt;&gt; but they may all have had the same
origin in the same culture that
&gt;&gt; uh breakaway culture of Bruce culture uh
breakaway culture that first cracked
time travel. That's something that I
think people have a hard time you know
wrapping their minds around and will
help to make sense out of a lot of the
insane cases that we we see like I'll
give you one example case of Reinhold
Schmidt.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
He was this American
uh from where was he? Was it
can't remember it was one of the states
like the Dakotas or I can't remember.
Anyway, not a highly populated area guy
from the country.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And Ryan Holt Schmidt
was I want to say Nebraska. Anyway, he
this is case is from 1957 and he's out
driving and his car dies and there are
two other uh cars and a tractor that are
also taken out by the EMP of this UFO.
So, there were multiple witnesses and
these people independently reported
&gt;&gt; the incident to the police.
&gt;&gt; But Reinhold Schmidt is is the guy who
they engage the people who come out of
this saucer and they bring him aboard.
He says he was engaged by two men. Then
when he was brought into the saucer,
there were another there was another man
and two women. Also,
&gt;&gt; the ship was from the outside a complete
solid uh piece of aluminum or highly
polished steel. On upon entering the
ship is entirely different. It is
transparent. You would look up, see the
sky, look down, see the grass below you
or see the entire countryside.
&gt;&gt; How many people were in the machine? Uh
there were six people, four men and two
ladies. Did they look like us? Uh yes,
they looked uh if they would see them on
the street, you couldn't detect them
unless you would had seen them on a
ship. Did they tell did they tell you
what they were doing here? Uh no, they
did not. I asked them what they were
doing here, what kind of a ship it was.
They said they couldn't tell me that at
this time.
&gt;&gt; And he says they didn't know Ryan Holt
Schmidt. They didn't know I had German
ancestry and I spoke German. This guy
learned German at university. So, not
only did he know some German from being
of German ancestry, at that time like a
quarter of America's population were of
German ancestry. Uh, but he also had
studied German at university. So, this
is what he claims. He says, "I realized
these guys were speaking in high German
to each other,
&gt;&gt; which the SS used to use
&gt;&gt; as a mark of distinction.
&gt;&gt; And he said they they asked him whether
he knew anything about the American
satellite program. And he said, "I don't
know. Why would I know anything about
the American satellite program? And then
he said they went on to predict a number
of failures that the US satellite
program would have in those early days
when we were competing with the Soviets,
Sputnik and so forth.
&gt;&gt; And then they dropped him off and he
went about his business.
&gt;&gt; Isn't there some other example of this
with Betty and Barney Hill? Famous
abduction case in 1961. This interracial
couple, you know, it's kind of the
archetypal abduction case. Uh wasn't
there some sort of Nazi connection
there?
&gt;&gt; Yes. And see, this is one of those cases
which has been warped by people where
like people have like they've they've uh
embellished the folklore and reworked it
into where these were like monstrous
aliens. But I believe that what you're
referring to is that if you look back at
Barney Hill's original statements and
when they first asked him what did they
look like, he said, "Well, they look
like Nazis."
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Well, they look like Nazis.
&gt;&gt; You saw him through this window. Oh, you
said there were a roller window. did was
a row of windows.
Just a huge row of windows
only divided by
uh strats or structures
that prevented it from being one solid
window.
Or then it would have been one solid
window.
and
the evil face
on the
he looks like a
German Nazi.
He's a Nazi.
&gt;&gt; He is not.
&gt;&gt; Did he have on a uniform?
&gt;&gt; Yes. How many other abductions are like
that where they say they look like
Nazis?
&gt;&gt; Um I haven't seen that many.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; But the important thing is that there
are such cases. Oh, I'll tell you
something else interesting in that
regard. So
um one of the comments in response to
our first uh conversation
was from the daughter of Desmond Leslie.
&gt;&gt; Who's that?
&gt;&gt; She commented to me on on my ex. So
George Adamsky
&gt;&gt; Yeah. co-authored his first book, The
Flying Saucers of Landed, with this guy
Desmond Leslie. He was like a not a
ghost writer, but like a collab
collaborative author, right?
&gt;&gt; Who would help people write books
&gt;&gt; and she reached out saying that she's
the daughter of Desmond Lesie and
&gt;&gt; she said in our family
&gt;&gt; Mhm. We her father said always said that
it was Nazis who contacted Adamsky
&gt;&gt; really
&gt;&gt; and they were pretending to be Venusians
and that yeah that so he helped Adamsky
write this book where Adamsky claims
these people are Venusians and they
claimed they were Venusians or some of
them come from Mars and whatever he said
that we always knew it was Nazis were
pretending to be Venusians. They had
like a, you know, disguised themselves
and created a theatrical
psychological operation. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; To present themselves as if they were
extraterrestrials.
&gt;&gt; This is so bizarre. There are a couple
other interesting stories. One is, you
know, Paul Melon was one of the founders
of the CIA.
&gt;&gt; There's a story that he told his
grandson, this guy who's still alive
today is John Warner IV.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; And um I guess he's having some martinis
with Paul Melon. And you know in his
third martini Paul Melon says in 1944
I was in modern-day you know uh Czech
Republic and I was or was it Czech
Republic or Czechoslovakia?
Czechoslovakia. Okay. And and and
uh in his third in the course of his
third Martini he says that in 1944 I was
in modern day Czechoslovakia and I was
there with Alan Dulles. They were on
some tech retrieval mission and they
were standing on top of a flying saucer.
&gt;&gt; And my grandfather said, "Look, you
know, we we were in a facility, a
hanger, and we saw, you know, a German
flying disc and I said, you know, oh, is
that the one that was cobbled together
with six BMW jet engines?" And he
laughed and he said, "No."
&gt;&gt; And so that's a really interesting fact
as well. And then um Harold Malmgrren
bring it back to the top said that the
magenta craft was actually exfiltrated
from Italy via the Nazi rat lines which
people like Reinhard Galen were helping
to kind of orchestrate and it was by the
Knights of Malta. And Reinhardt Galen
was part of this Monte Carlo group which
was this kind of elite of the elite uh
Knights of Malta faction uh which is
fascinating and and this faction
comprised both Nazis people like
Reinhard Galen and Jews like Henry
Kissinger.
&gt;&gt; Yep.
&gt;&gt; So
&gt;&gt; that's right and Otto Scorzani is
working with the Mossad in the early
1970s
&gt;&gt; and Scorzani was also a part of this
Knights of Malta faction.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. I was invited by the way to join
the Knights of Malta at one point.
&gt;&gt; Why do you think you were invited?
because you started to to brush up
against their
&gt;&gt; Oh, for sure. Yeah. Yeah. And I I
declined.
&gt;&gt; Why did you decline?
&gt;&gt; First of all, I was being invited to
participate in some kind of initiation
ritual in Malta.
&gt;&gt; Uhhuh.
&gt;&gt; And I happened to know that the the
fellow who invited me had a track record
of recording people involved in sex acts
and using it as blackmail material and
so forth. Okay. who was
&gt;&gt; so I was not about to go to
&gt;&gt; Malt and besides by the way it's a just
that kind of thing okay
&gt;&gt; and he was a member of a dozen different
secret societies this guy at a high
level including the Knights of Molto
&gt;&gt; I would never join any such organization
just for the record
&gt;&gt; Masons tried to get me at one point high
level Masons wanted to bring me in I
will never join any such organization
because at the moment you do that you
lose your independence
&gt;&gt; so anyway but Um,
absolutely. This stuff I've heard the
same stuff about uh Doles and you know
witnessing the saucer in Czechlovakia
and so on and so forth.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; The interesting thing about Alan Dulles
which I think we briefly did touch on in
our first conversation is that although
it might have been actually when we were
on the phone
&gt;&gt; Allan Dulles and his brother John Foster
Dulles
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; funded the rise of the Nazis.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Together with uh JP Morgan Chase and
Rockefeller.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; From out of New York. Yeah. So did
Prescott Bush.
&gt;&gt; Oh yeah. And so look, the point is this,
that in a lot of ways, both paperclip
and the absorption of the Galen network
were a homecoming. It's almost as if
Nazi Germany was set up as a field
laboratory to do some highly unethical
things.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Which would then be harvested back to
America. So is your and then is your
world model or mental model something
like there's like an elite strata and
these are the names we're throwing out
now um you know of people who come from
some of whom come from these older
families some of whom are just like you
know the kind of elite ruling class of
the United States
&gt;&gt; uh that might be coordinated with either
incidentally or deliberately with this
sort of nonhuman faction or or not even
non-human faction You don't like that
word, this sort of Nordic overlord.
&gt;&gt; Yes. Yeah. But it's it's even um more of
a tangled web than that. You see,
because of the time element that I was
talking about,
&gt;&gt; it could be that some of these elites
have had contact with these Nordics for
a long time.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; But there's another possibility, too. M
&gt;&gt; it's a possibility which you know I
speculatively investigate in closer
encounters
&gt;&gt; and that's that these elites become the
Nordics
&gt;&gt; that if you look at how obsessed these
people were with eugenics I lay it out
in Closer Encounters at length how many
of these elites in America in Britain in
Germany but people think that like
somehow the Nazis came up with eugenics.
No, they were playing catch-up. The Nazi
leadership was saying like these
Americans are going to dominate the
world with all their eugenics programs.
We better like catch up fast.
&gt;&gt; The world leader in eugenics from the
1890s until the 1930s was the United
States of America.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, then they got it from people
like Ceil Roads and you know a lot of
you know 19th centronology and that sort
of thing.
&gt;&gt; Yes. But when you look back at that era
all the top scientists, the top
political
decision makers, federal judges
&gt;&gt; and certainly the aristocrats were
ardently pro eugenics. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Even like Margaret Sanger and
people who you think did these days are
associated with the left unlike plant
planned parenthood and all that. They
were ardent eugenicists.
&gt;&gt; Now
if you combine eugenics
&gt;&gt; the in other words the will to create a
master race
&gt;&gt; together with oultism
&gt;&gt; right early psychical research and
cultivation of oult abilities
&gt;&gt; together with exotic propulsion
technology.
It converges on what the Nordics become.
&gt;&gt; So for all we know, I said Oroaros
earlier, right? What's happening is that
a future state of a certain culture is
contacting itself in the past and
reinforcing itself in the past
&gt;&gt; and trying to pull the timeline towards
itself or something.
&gt;&gt; Actualize itself temporally actualize
itself.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; It's very interesting. And so do you
think there would be competing factions
like the Nordics would be fighting
against other possible timeline variants
that want to actualize themselves?
&gt;&gt; I think that's who the Ashuras are. So,
you know, we have throughout all of
human mythology
&gt;&gt; this this uh account of rebels, rebel
gods or rebel angels
&gt;&gt; who break with the program, right? And
the Sanskrit texts call them the
Ashuras. The Greeks call them the
Titans. And but they're in every
mythology of the planet. It's always
this rebel faction that exists that's
trying to break free from the control
system.
&gt;&gt; So, yes, I think so. And you know, I
think Lynn's story
&gt;&gt; is another corroboration of that that
there's people who don't like the
program and they don't like the society
they're from. But is I don't know this
idea that the Nordics or whatever are
this homogeneous sort of, you know, one
world authoritarian, you know,
government, you know, these these sort
of perfect people who've been
eugenicized to no end, and then they're
fighting this sort of rebel angel
faction. Doesn't that feel too clean?
like what if there are factions of the
Nordics that are good or whatever. Yeah.
I I I just don't know, you know, or do
do you think that, you know,
&gt;&gt; I think here here's I think here um a
statement that Peter Thiel made when he
was being asked about the close
encounter phenomenon on Rogan is very
relevant.
&gt;&gt; If you have um faster than light travel,
there's something um really crazy that
has to be true on a cultural, political,
social level. And there may be other
solutions but I'll give you my two. Um
one of one of them is that um you need
complete totalitarian controls and it is
like it is
the pe the individuals they might be
might not be perfect they might be
demons doesn't matter but you have you
have a demonic totalitarian control of
your society where it's like you have
you have like parasyc psychological mind
meld with everybody and no one can act
independently of anybody else. No one
can ever launch a warp drive weapon and
everybody who has that ability isn't
like a m mind link with everybody else
or or something something like that. You
can't have libertarian individualistic
free agency,
&gt;&gt; right?
And then I think the other the other
version socially and culturally is
they have to be like perfectly
altruistic non-self-interest. They have
to be angels. And so the Pulka literal
thing I' I'd come to is the aliens. It's
not that they might be demons or angels.
They must be demons or angels if you
have faster than light travel.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. He's basically saying it's either
angels or
&gt;&gt; angels and that's the language he used
which I take exception to that angels or
demons
&gt;&gt; because I think maybe in a nichian
fashion the moral evaluation there needs
to be flipped
&gt;&gt; that the angels are the ones controlling
the totalitarian hierarchical
mindmelded
hiveminded system by the way and you
know I used to teach comparative
religion in all the Abrahamic religions
one thing that they consistently say
about the angels is that they have no
will of their own. M
&gt;&gt; the angels have no real individuality.
They have no real will of their own.
They do the will of God,
&gt;&gt; which like binds them together with a
single purpose.
&gt;&gt; That's like a totalitarian society
controlled by an AI.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay. Now, I'm going to go somewhere
really disturbing with this, but it
&gt;&gt; an angel just means messenger
generically, you know? So,
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Evangelos
&gt;&gt; and the Hebrew original meant the same
thing.
&gt;&gt; And so, like for example, the angels who
come to Abraham There's three men.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And uh they they did look particularly
beautiful because the one who goes to
Sodom to retrieve Lot
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; the leerous men want to have sex with
this guy cuz he's so good-looking. And
by the way, the Nordics are known for
that. And they're known to be like super
good-looking people. They look like
supermodels. Basically,
&gt;&gt; Colonel Alexander, when he told me the
story of the the couple of Nordics that
he saw in the casino hotel in Las Vegas,
he said they were like that, too. They
were like out of the pages of a fashion
magazine.
Anyway, um
place I want to go from there uh about
the angels and angelic hierarchy and you
know why in fact it would be so simple.
You you said it, you know, it seems too
simple.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; U gods versus titans, right? Davas
versus Asheras. No, for the reason Teal
gave,
&gt;&gt; you would have exactly that bifurcation
and it would be a very black and white
conflict between an extremely repressive
hierarchical totalitarian society that
allows for almost no individual
individuation
and on the other hand individuals who
who don't want to live in such a world
and who are trying to find a way to
carve out some space of freedom
&gt;&gt; and but who have the same technology
&gt;&gt; and so the disturbing place I want go uh
from there is relevant to the subject of
my latest book which is is a study of
the afterlife
death the transitional state Tibetans
call the Bardto state and rebirth
evidence for reincarnation so so
in the course of researching this book
I've looked into
a lot of cases that are filtered out of
the hippie- dippy woo woo narrative
about near-death experiences
In particular, one of the most famous
is an account that Robert Monroe, you
know, who founded the, you know, Monroe
Institute and so forth that the CIA used
to use sometimes as a place to conduct
advanced remote viewing, Robert Monroe
in his second book, Far Journeys, I
think from 1985,
&gt;&gt; basically says that in the course of his
astral projections, he discovered that
we're living in a control system
that is managed by entities
who work for a demiurge
that's harvesting us for what he called
luch.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; He said that we're in a louch farm. That
humans
are being deliberately subjected to
conditions that create extreme emotional
states. Mhm. Uh extreme suffering,
misery, fear, terror, ecstasy, extreme
desire, you know, uh pathological
impulses, you know, and these are all
being used to basically generate a form
of energy that they can harvest from the
human soul,
&gt;&gt; including after death, where they
basically juice souls for the luch.
Now, uh, there was also a researcher
called Carla Turner.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Who I believe was killed, even though
she supposedly died of cancer at the age
of 48. The CIA has something that mimics
a very fast acting cancer. And they've
used this on a number of occasions, to
kill prominent people, I believe, also
including the Shaw of Iran.
&gt;&gt; Really? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Who else?
&gt;&gt; Remember uh Peter Jennings did this
special on UFOs? Do you remember that in
the night whenever it was that he died
shortly before his death?
&gt;&gt; Mhm. He did this huge uh special on UFOs
for which he had recorded like days and
days worth of footage with all kinds of
prominent whistle whistleblowers
&gt;&gt; and it was supposed to air on prime time
television with him as an air. Yeah,
they aired it but what they aired
excluded 90% of the material.
&gt;&gt; I didn't know that. Peter Jennings did a
UFO special including a lot of
whistleblowers.
&gt;&gt; Extensive.
&gt;&gt; I had no idea.
&gt;&gt; Like it was supposed to be like a
multi-part program that would air over
weeks or something. And he he records
this thing gets cancer drops dead.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; Like within a year of like this program
airing.
&gt;&gt; I had no idea to know about any of this.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Like Walter Kronite 2.0.
&gt;&gt; So that's another case of it.
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; And so I think Carla Turner was killed
by this. In any case, Carla Turner
&gt;&gt; uh did interviews with a lot of uh ex
experiencers, abductees who reported the
same kinds of things as Robert Monroe
did in far journeys
&gt;&gt; where they said that we are in a control
system that's being managed from out of
a metallic sphere just beyond the earth.
And they describe the inside of this
thing. But I think going back to our
first conversation, what they're
describing is the inside of the moon. M
that the there is a what we might call
using the Soviet language a psychotronic
control system,
&gt;&gt; a kind of spectral technology
inside of the moon which is
impinging on and manipulating humans in
the afterlife state.
&gt;&gt; What? And it's not uh omnipotent.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not a flawless system. So,
it's possible to assert your free will
and self-determination in the face of
this system, but it's very difficult.
So, a lot of people have had near-death
experiences, for example, they describe
being pulled toward this light. It's
like they couldn't resist going into the
light. They tried in some cases, but it
was almost as if it was an electromagnet
like pulling them into it.
&gt;&gt; Sure. And then when they go into the
light, one of the most common things
that's described is that people are
shown their dead relatives.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And religious authority figures like
Jesus
&gt;&gt; and or or like if you're a Hindu, you
see Hindu gods. Interestingly,
&gt;&gt; I'll give you a terrifying case from a
Hindu in a minute.
&gt;&gt; So you're pulled into this light and
then they show you your dead relatives
and they show you Jesus and whatever.
&gt;&gt; Well, here's the problem, Jesse, is that
if you look at Dr. Ian Stevenson's
extremely rigorous research on
reincarnation that he did at the
University of Virginia for decades on
children's spontaneous memories of past
lives. All the cases show that the
average interval between death and
reincarnation is something like it could
be anywhere from 6 months to 3 years
maximum. It's usually ne not more than
several years.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
So, when you are having a near-death
experience
and your grandmother and and let's say
you're in your 60s or Yeah. in your 60s
and you see your grandmother who died
when you were in your 20s.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; That's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] You are being shown an
artificially
generated similacrim of your dead
relatives to manipulate you
&gt;&gt; by a psychotronic technology.
&gt;&gt; Oh, this is getting
&gt;&gt; by a psychotronic technology.
&gt;&gt; Will you really think that?
&gt;&gt; Yes, I do.
&gt;&gt; Really?
&gt;&gt; And I say that as someone who was, you
know, at the bedside at at the death bed
of a couple of my relatives who were
experiencing these things. You know,
when people are very close to death,
they also see dead relatives come around
their hospital beds. very commonly
reported and so in the case one case was
my great aunt or I was there while she
was like describing to not just not
describing to she was having
conversations with dead relatives that
you know the other family members knew
oh that's so and so she's talking to so-
and so as if he's like in the hospital
room and the most striking case was with
my own grandmother my Persian
grandmother uh you know to whom I owe
the fact that I fluently speak Persian
because both of my parents worked when I
was grow growing up and they would leave
me with her during the days and She
hardly spoke any English. So I learned
like Persian practically as my first
language in New York. So I was very
close to my grandmother. And when she
was dying, this exact thing happened.
She starts talking to my dead
grandfather. Now my my Persian
grandfather died when my father was
four. Okay, that guy reincarnated 60 70
years ago.
So she's talking to something that's
being projected into our mind
psychotronically. But how do you know
it's being projected psychotronically
and it's not just a function of her own
age and sort of that's the conventional
skeptical response I would say based on
what Robert Monroe described in terms of
the terrain of the afterlife through his
astral projections which then other
people at the Monroe Institute were able
to replicate and based on the kinds of
accounts that let's say Carla Turner got
from abductees of being taken to places
that were not just like, you know, like
space alien bases. There were places
where the soul was being handled as some
kind of anformational
matrix andor energy source.
&gt;&gt; This I mean um John Lear would say that
there was like a soul catcher on the
moon, but he also was kind of crazy and
would say a lot of stuff that you know
probably was BS.
&gt;&gt; I guess my point is we don't need to dep
I've heard that by the way. I've heard
him talk about that. My point is we
don't need to depend on him. Other
people have said this and let me give
you one more example of somebody who's
described this is
&gt;&gt; oh god I hope I don't get this name
wrong. Scott Turner or Scott
Scott Trevor or Scott Turner
&gt;&gt; uh was a leader of a uh a team of remote
viewers
and these are private sector remote
viewers I think of the kind who offer
service corporate services and stuff
like that
&gt;&gt; who did a remote viewing on the word
moksha
&gt;&gt; moksha so what was in the envelope was
moksha the target they were blind to
&gt;&gt; moksha means liberation in Sanskrit it's
like how you get out of the wheel of
Samsara.
&gt;&gt; And so he does this session with his
team and long story short, he comes back
with this horrific account that all of
them do. Of course, they're all working
the same target line to the same target
and they're all doing this
independently. And then they compare
notes and they said that the you can't
achieve mosha.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Because as you try to escape the earth,
there's something that grabs you and
bends you back toward the earth. like if
you're a ray of light, it's like it
bends the light that's your soul back
toward the earth like a what do you call
them? A lensing effect.
&gt;&gt; And he said it's originating from some
uh celestial body near the earth
&gt;&gt; and that it is part of a vast machinery
of energy extraction which was set up in
our solar system
at the end of a war that devastated the
solar system. He said that like millions
of years ago
there were these horrendous people who
wanted to establish this energy
harvesting system here and wanted to
exploit humanity for this purpose and
there was a rebellion against them and
the the conflict was waged across the
entire solar system. Now this is
interesting in terms of what we
discussed regarding Mars in our first
conversation and the apparent
devastation of Mars in some kind of
nuclear war according to Dr.
Brandenburg.
So Turner and his group said um Turner
Trevor Scott whatever this remote viewer
and his it's going to be in my new book
Thanosis
&gt;&gt; but uh you can find it Google remote
viewing mosha.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; People were so disturbed by the video
that the guy took it down. He has all
his other videos up but he took this one
down but other people uploaded it
&gt;&gt; to other sites. And uh so he says the
rebels who wanted to like preserve human
freedom and self-determination didn't
want humans to be harvested and
exploited this way. They lost the war.
&gt;&gt; And ever since then we've been inside
basically this prison
&gt;&gt; where we are spiritually manipulated and
harvested for our energy.
&gt;&gt; When we originally described this site,
it's a fence or a grid around a place.
This acts as a barrier. It collects and
traps people, things or objects. This is
actually an innocent planet that is
being used in an unintended way. And
this meters the flow and acts as a
checkpoint and an access point for an
external force. Uh, one viewer described
it as similar to hocus pocus and in a
way of it's it's energetics that the
viewer wasn't familiar with and it's
occurring on a crowded planet. It's a
deliberate function that acts as a cage.
People have been dispersed here and a
form of perverted injustice is
occurring. Third viewer described it as
a large naturally formed object like a
planet that acts as an animal pen. This
is a refugee camp tucked away out of
sight and a magnetic force. It stirs,
agitates and works in a cylindrical
manner like clockwork over a long
expanse of time.
Uh in my session, my work described a
planetary system that's extremely
crowded and jammed, ghostly voices are
flooding into this place and it's
incredibly harrowing for them. Uh it's a
bone chilling experience. As a viewer,
when I remote viewed this, I had
descriptions that it made me upset in
the session. It elicited contempt for
what was going on at the site. But uh
the activity at the site was this
concept of a net that's been spun. And
it's an operation of catch and release
on a grand scale. So there's a massive
grid that exists around this planet and
it acts as a checkpoint, a way point or
rest stop where souls are drained and
then that in turn energizes something
else.
&gt;&gt; That's so depressing. I mean how do you
have is there any aspirational streak
within that? Do you believe in God? Do
you think if you
&gt;&gt; I believe in Prometheus. In other words,
in other words, the reason that
Prometheus has become such a central
archetype to my philosophical project
is because if you look at the structure
of this myth,
it encompasses all the major elements of
most religious belief systems, but in a
way that's empowering to humanity.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So, for example, in the myth in
Prometheian myth,
&gt;&gt; we're not created by Yahweh or by Enlil
or by whatever uh celestial tyrant wants
to loos harvest us.
&gt;&gt; We're created by this genius like
artistic spirit who rebelled against
Zeus, right? Because he thought Zeus was
a sadistic tyrant. And we're created by
him in his image to be a race of new
gods. And the only reason that we don't
wind up fulfilling that destiny is that
Prometheus is punished by Zeus, right?
And chained in the Caucasus and has his
liver devoured. What does the devouring
of the liver mean? The liver was used uh
for um fortuneelling by the ancient
Greeks. It was like crystal ball gazing.
So they believed that they could read
the future uh by like you know looking
into the blackness of the liver by
candle light and so forth.
&gt;&gt; So what that symbol means is that the
eagle of Zeus wants to know what
Prometheus knows.
&gt;&gt; So not only were we created by this this
you know positive spirit also
Prometheus
knows more than Zeus and can see further
than Zeus. So our creator is more
knowing than the sadistic tyrant
&gt;&gt; and our creator wants to cultivate in us
the same kind of forethought, the same
kind of visionary creative capacity,
right? the in in Escalas's writings and
in various Greek texts on Prometheus,
it's very clearly understood that the
fire that Prometheus stole from the
forge of Hesus and Olympus and brought
to humanity is a symbol of techn
meaning both uh craft in the sense of
the arts and craft in the sense of
technological science where we get the
word technology from.
&gt;&gt; So it's a means of human empowerment,
right? But wouldn't you say a lot of
modern technological progress is not
empowering at all and in fact it sort of
clamps down on human flourishing and so
like you have you know the American
Prometheus would be Oenheimer and
created you know a nuclear bomb.
&gt;&gt; How didn't how do you know he didn't
give us the means to defend ourselves
right? Why are these Nordics obsessed
with disarming us of nuclear weapons? M
&gt;&gt; the only defense that we would have
against such a civilization if indeed
it's lording over us is precisely our
nuclear arsenal.
&gt;&gt; So you think but then couldn't you sort
of if you really had like 360 you know
control over over the world wouldn't you
be able to sort of like pit people
against each other? I mean in a world of
mutually assured destruction you end up
with this kind of weird uh like holding
pattern of geopolitics where tensions
are rising but people themselves are
sort of you know in these sort of
Orwellian you know uh farm houses or
something and they they're sort of
withering away and so that that doesn't
seem particularly empowering. Maybe a
short quick answer to that, but then I
want to answer your your bigger question
&gt;&gt; or even information technology.
&gt;&gt; I want to answer a bigger question about
the misuse of technology, but just quick
short answer to that one.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; I think the reason that we destroyed the
Soviet Union,
&gt;&gt; which I consider the worst mistake ever
made by the United States.
&gt;&gt; Why do you think that's the worst
mistake?
&gt;&gt; Is because the Soviet Union and the
United States could have and should have
and would have eventually combined their
forces against these Nordics.
&gt;&gt; I think that what John F. Kennedy wanted
to do.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And what his brother RFK was going to
resume as policy.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Was an alliance with the Soviet Union.
After all, remember, we had fought the
Nazis together with the Soviet Union.
Was an alliance with the Soviet Union
where we would both go to the moon
together and if necessary, we would both
defend the freedom and independence of
humanity using nuclear weapons together
against this threat.
And as bad as some people think
communism is, I mean, I'm no fan. I'm no
communist. I'm no fan of communism. But
look at the Soviet uh cosmism
and how progressive it is.
&gt;&gt; But JFK was trying to defang the
American nuclear arsenal. So if he
actually viewed the Nordics as some sort
of threat, he was trying to disarm.
&gt;&gt; In in no way do I believe for a minute
that JFK would have been one of these
total nuclear disarmament people. I
don't I don't buy it.
&gt;&gt; You don't think so?
&gt;&gt; I don't buy it. I think he would have
built an alliance with the Soviet Union
where our respective arsenals are not
principally aimed at each other but an
aim remember going back to Ian Fleming
inspector
&gt;&gt; I think JFK figured it out
&gt;&gt; or had it told to them by Eisenhower
&gt;&gt; that there's this third power in the
world
&gt;&gt; because there the the you know he had
these back channels with Kruev and this
guy Norman Cousins who was a family
friend was going back and forth and
&gt;&gt; the rumor was that he wanted full day
tant and and disarm armament
&gt;&gt; and he wanted to go to the moon with the
Russians.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, they want he wanted to do some
sort of cooperative space program, but
that um yeah, but still the the nuclear
disarmament part would go against some
sort of belief that you know we were
trying to defend ourselves against some
alien.
&gt;&gt; In any case, the reason I think that it
was the worst mistake we ever made
&gt;&gt; is because there are far worse things
than Soviet communism
&gt;&gt; and Nazism is one of them in my view. In
my view, that kind that kind of, you
know, SS fascist mentality, yeah, it's
worse than Soviet cosmism and like what
Constantine Silkovsky wanted for the
future of mankind in my view.
&gt;&gt; Well, I think that Tilowki stuff is
interesting, but that but the um I mean
this communism, you know, both are
horrible, but communism killed more
people.
&gt;&gt; I know. And way more globally.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And that's not necessarily the
measure of the ethics of a system.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
Like for example um
suppos I don't want to linger on this
for a very long time but I'll give you a
very short okay
&gt;&gt; suppose that um the Islamic state of
Iraq and Syria
&gt;&gt; Mhm. had metastasized and we weren't
able to contain it and that let's say
they succeeded in toppling the Saudi
royal family and you saw recently how
Saudi Arabia and Pakistan made this
strategic alliance where now Saudi
Arabia is protected by Pakistan's
nuclear weapons and besides it's been
rumored for years that Saudi Arabia paid
for Pakistan's nuclear weapons to be
developed so they have Saudi barcodes on
them what so suppose ISIS succeeded in
taking over the you know Riad and then
subsequently Mecca and Medina
&gt;&gt; and then they wind up with Pakistan's
nuclear arsenal and we get this
metastasizing Islamic state in the
world, right?
&gt;&gt; Well, you know what? It would be
necessary to go to war with that thing.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And a lot of people will be dead as a
result of that.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Now, is that because of the evils of
American liberal capitalism? No. It's
because we had to deal with a very
difficult problem.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And we were we we would be doing
it to defend human freedom and progress.
Uh from their own perspective, the
Soviets considered themselves to be the
standardbearers of liberation from
oppression and progress including
scientific and technological innovation
against forces of regression and
tyranny. Right? And you know to give
them some credit look they put women in
space before we did.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; So I I think that you know this decision
to dismantle the Soviet Union was
horrendous and I think was very
deliberate. And guess who was behind it?
Well, a principal figure. I mean, behind
the death blow
&gt;&gt; because look, it's one thing to keep
them as an enemy. It's good to have them
as an enemy.
&gt;&gt; You want to have good rivals.
&gt;&gt; Who would you say is behind?
&gt;&gt; We have a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] rival today. China is a
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;] rival to have
&gt;&gt; because it is a collectivistic
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; hiveminded
confucutionist regressive traditionalist
society. Fundamentally, it's no longer a
mauist, by the I mean, you you know that
it's morphed into some kind of national
socialism that's extremely Confucianist
and collectivist.
That's a that's a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] rival to have.
You want to have a rival that makes you
the best you can be. And the Soviets
were that we kept each other on on our
toes.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. The we now we're in all these sort
of bad games, local games with the
Chinese where it's like the AGI race.
You could say the modern academia in the
US is kind of like the confusion
bureaucracy or something. You know, I
think a lot of people care a lot about
IQ and like, you know, genetic
engineering, which is, you know,
probably not the race you want to be you
want to be running or whatever. Um, you
know, you could think of social media in
the US as like the aversion of the
social credit score or something. So,
there are a lot of these weird analoges.
Yeah. That um, you know, right?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. It's not great. And then like put
you know in in kind of the COVID
paradigm like they have a surveillance
state and then it's like you know now we
have one.
&gt;&gt; So the Soviets were a good rival. They
were a good rival. We should have kept
them as that
&gt;&gt; instead of like this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
traditionalist Russia that we have now
orthodox neo orthodox zorist system
under Putin. This is a disaster and it
was done deliberately. And who dealt the
death blow? George HW Bush
&gt;&gt; whose father Prescott Bush Mhm.
&gt;&gt; was one of Hitler's men in America.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. Okay. So, and of course he was the
head of the CIA. George HW Bush
&gt;&gt; was one of these American presidents who
actually had full access to the UFO file
because he had been briefed when he was
deep in the deep state.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And there's connections, you know,
from him to the Kennedy assassination
and and so
&gt;&gt; yeah, he went missing when Kennedy was
assassinated. And then he was supposed
to brief I think Carter wanted him to
brief him on UFOs, but he then he wanted
to be, you know, um made director of the
CIA, which he eventually was made direct
director, but like you know, there was
this sort of quid proquo thing there.
&gt;&gt; And I believe it's been since confirmed
that he was in Dallas. He was in Dallas
when
&gt;&gt; he definitely was in Dallas, I think.
And I I think he met with everybody on
Clint Merchensson's ranch or something
around that time too. And
&gt;&gt; yeah, I mean it it would have made
sense. He was like the skull and bones
kids who he was in with, you know, James
Jesus Engleton who was a Delos acolyte.
And
&gt;&gt; yeah,
&gt;&gt; you know, he's the second politician to
ever use the term new world order in a
speech.
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; The first being Adolf Hitler.
&gt;&gt; Really? Yeah. Oh, that's fascinating.
Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So that's who dealt the death blow to
the Soviet Union. And I think it was a
huge mistake.
&gt;&gt; That's really interesting. So, you think
that was part of some sort of uh one
world order plan or something?
&gt;&gt; Absolutely.
&gt;&gt; Fascinating. Well, I don't know. I mean
that they say that it was like um
you know the priest, the general and the
businessman or whatever. It was an
alliance between you know multiple
different factions in the US that united
you know the country against communism
at the time. So, but you're saying that
George H
&gt;&gt; country was always united against
communism. Again, I'm not saying we
shouldn't have had the Soviet Union as a
rival,
&gt;&gt; but you're saying the escalation and the
escalation in the 80s.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And the decision to really
collapse the system, the Soviet system,
&gt;&gt; which by the way, what we did to to
bring that about was horrendously
unethical.
&gt;&gt; Namely, the creation of al-Qaeda,
&gt;&gt; the United States creation of al-Qaeda
in Pakistan to send them into
Afghanistan to make something
viable from out of the Taliban to fight
the Soviets in a protracted war of
attrition to demoralize the Soviet
citizenry and bankrupt the Soviet Union
and eventually collapse the system. But
wasn't that I don't know an example of
like the a triple bank shop gone wrong
or something like you know it is true
that like we trained the muhajadin and
trained Osama bin Laden and
&gt;&gt; there were multiple kinds of mojaheden
like some of them Ahmed Sha Masoud
leading the northern alliance was a
decent guy and the CIA killed him right
before 911. Okay, we we wiped United
States wiped out all the moderate
elements in Afghanistan and sent in
al-Qaeda to train all the most raid
Islamic fundamentalists and did this for
the explicit purpose of defeating the
Soviet Union
&gt;&gt; as if a Soviet Afghanistan would have
been a bad thing.
&gt;&gt; Afghanistan becoming a province of the
Soviet Union would have been the best
thing that ever happened to the Afghan
people.
&gt;&gt; Interesting,
&gt;&gt; you know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. And that this was like Charlie
Wilson's war or whatever and what was it
79 or
&gt;&gt; Yeah. have a 77 77 79. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Interesting. Yeah. Um Okay. Uh who who
is David Paulades?
David Paul. Okay. So,
okay. Well,
one of the most disturbing aspects of
the close encounter phenomenon
is its intersection with missing
person's cases.
&gt;&gt; So, there's this researcher David Pitus.
Politis. Pitus I think it's Pus David
Pletus
who has written a whole series of books
called missing 411 missing 411 series of
books exhaustively researched he's been
to all the national parks in the country
&gt;&gt; which unbeknownst to most people are
hotspots for disappearances of of you
know large numbers of individuals go
missing in our national parks
&gt;&gt; and the devil's in the details of these
cases uh Because you have to look at how
well-trained some of these hikers or
hunters are.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Who disappear
and leave their provisions behind.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Like sometimes folded perfectly
intact,
&gt;&gt; uneaten food.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; So presume if if they were there's no
remains, not like a bear ate them or
something. And you know, if they were
starving out there for days, you you
expect that their candy bar wouldn't be
left or whatever, you know, and they
leave their weapons behind.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And and their stuff is littered over
large distances in some cases. M
some of the worst cases are ones
involving children where like a child
will go off a a trail
at let's say a summer camp that's on the
edge of a national park and the child
will go missing
and then the child's body will be found
thousands of feet higher
&gt;&gt; um but not until months later.
&gt;&gt; So the search services will come in and
they'll scour the entire area. there
won't be a single trace of this kid.
Then like after a hiatus of weeks or
months,
remains of the kid will be found but
like at a much higher elevation like it
was dropped there.
&gt;&gt; Whoa.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
And long story short, I mean, I I cite
this in in some detail in Closer
Encounters, uh, David Pitus' various
books, but he discovered a connection
between this and Close Encounters where
in the same areas people will go
missing, people saw UFOs.
&gt;&gt; And he also discovered that the feds
have case files on this and hiding them.
&gt;&gt; Interesting.
&gt;&gt; Federal authorities, particularly the
FBI, has a whole
like uh archive of this type of
material.
&gt;&gt; Wow.
&gt;&gt; Which they are keeping secret
&gt;&gt; of people who have gone missing in
national parks and potential connection
to the close encounter phenomenon.
&gt;&gt; So and and one of the most interesting
things about this is temporal
disorientation.
&gt;&gt; So for example, there's one case where
some young woman not everyone goes
missing. Sometimes they go in the
Twilight Zone for 48 hours and they come
out.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. So,
&gt;&gt; Travis Walton is a classic example.
Arizona.
&gt;&gt; That's right. So, one woman went into a
florest
&gt;&gt; and she got lost hiking and couldn't
find her way out and she's there for
what seems to her to be,
I don't know, a day or two, something
like that, like many, many hours. Many,
many hours. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And
then eventually she finds her way out
and people tell her she's been missing
for a lot longer than she perceived.
&gt;&gt; And she tells them when she was in there
she ran across one other hiker who was
also lost. And for a while there were
fellow travelers and then they decided
to part ways and both independently try
to find a way out. She describes this
other woman that she ran into while she
was lost.
The description fits to someone who went
lost went missing there like a decade or
more ago
&gt;&gt; and was never fed.
&gt;&gt; You follow?
&gt;&gt; So it's like there's a local
spatiotemporal vortex
&gt;&gt; where this poor girl who who this hiker
ran into had been there for like a
decade.
&gt;&gt; Whoa.
&gt;&gt; And she was still trying to get out
&gt;&gt; suspended in time.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And the h this hiker got out and
the other girl that she ran into while
she was in the forest never did. M
&gt;&gt; okay which sounds like the Bermuda
Triangle but on land.
&gt;&gt; These are these mountains exist
everywhere. There's one in Zimbabwe
actually near Ruo where the famous
sighting occurred in the '90s. In fact,
I wanted to go and I asked uh a friend
who's in touch with local authorities
like hey can my friend go hiking on this
thing and they were extremely uh you
know like serious about like no the mist
send tends to descend on this mountain
and people consistently go missing and
all the authorities are aware of that.
Mhm.
&gt;&gt; So,
&gt;&gt; that's pretty remarkable.
&gt;&gt; Y
&gt;&gt; and so you think it's some sort of like
um transtemporal suspension area or
something?
&gt;&gt; And the other thing that's consistently
reported in these cases where the person
is found eventually or they they can
make it back out of the pocket.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Or or there there's another interesting
type of cases where it's more than one
person, right? So, it's like a group of
hunters.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And one of them goes missing and the
others come back.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And the ones who come back saying
right before he disappeared, right
before Charlie disappeared,
there was no sound.
&gt;&gt; All the insects went silent. It was like
we couldn't hear a leaf moving.
&gt;&gt; Whoa.
&gt;&gt; Which is exactly what people describe
around UFOs.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And there's also often like an uh almost
like a local inertial reference frame
that's different. There's like time
warping involved like Travis Walton uh
was fully shaved and he came back 4 days
labor later with a full beard.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And so there are things like that.
Um or the the trees tend to grow faster
around, you know, the UFOs,
&gt;&gt; which goes back to what we're talking
about in terms of the bell. Yeah. And
what they encountered, you know.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, these places seem like kind
of um vortexes, energy vortexes or
something. Mount Kyash is an example. I
think Sod Guru went and said that his
fingernails grew faster on the mountain
or whatever.
&gt;&gt; Um there are a few of these all around
the world. Sedona, you know, Arizona is
a classic example. Um you have some
places in Washington, Tacoma,
Washington. Skinwalker Ranch would be an
example maybe in Utah. Uh and and and
all of these places seem to have
electromagnetic anomalies as well.
&gt;&gt; Um geomagnetic anomalies. Um
&gt;&gt; okay. Who is Roger Koy and what's his
take on the devil?
I don't want to give the impression from
a lot of the things that we've discussed
that somehow I only focus on the nuts
and bolts aspect of close encounters.
Of course, you know, my first book,
Prometheus and Atlas, is is basically a
philosophical study of parasychology,
you know, and so it deals with uh the
whole plethora of evidence for the oult.
And it's obvious that you can't separate
close encounters from the oult. Even in
the case of these Nordics,
they appear to be, you know, people with
adept ESP. they're extremely uh highly
adept psionic um you know psionic uh
psionically capable people. So in that
sense even when you're dealing with the
Nordics like Adamsky or you know Billy
Meyer was dealing with them there's an
element of the occult there because also
perceptions can be manipulated by you
know adept telepaths
&gt;&gt; and by people with telekinesis
with with highly trained PK
But there's a whole other uh there's a
whole other
type of of cases. There's a there's a
whole other set of cases that as I
suggested in our first conversation
simply cannot be encompassed by this
nuts and bolts interpretation of Nordics
flying around in electrogravidic devices
where it looks like we're dealing with
some kind of a
uh superigh
&gt;&gt; that's able to manipulate perceptions on
a large scale and manifest uh
sort of uh transmogrifications of
phenomena like to to be able to pro
produce all kinds of shape-shifting
um miragages and uh you know
metamorphosing
apparitions.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Of the kind that John Ke focused his
research on. Mhm. You see it in his
study of all the weird happenings at
Point Pleasant, the Moth Man case, you
know, in particular. Uh, and you see it
throughout the Men in Black literature,
you know, how bizarre some of these
cases of men in black are. Did we get
into that at all in our first
conversation? The Men in Black.
&gt;&gt; Not too much. And I'm curious to get
your take on the Men in Black.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, like for example, this guy
um um was it auto
Bender
who wrote The Saucers and the Three Men?
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Do you remember? No. Albert Bender.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Albert Bender. Albert Bender.
&gt;&gt; So, this guy ran a flying saucer
research bureau.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And he claims that while he was
doing his research for, you know,
whatever the UFO articles he would come
out with in his periodical,
these three men in black materialized in
his attic. And he said they had he said
they had glowing orange eyes and they
smelled like sulfur
and they took him to some they
teleported him to, believe it or not, an
underground base in Antarctica. This is
what he was told that he was in
Antarctica all of a sudden. and they
told him some things about
I don't know what they do there and what
their concern is with the earth. Gave
him probably some [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] story like
they give everybody and uh then they
brought him back. Then subsequently he
said he was in a movie theater and he
noticed like these guys like all of a
sudden materialized in some row of seats
behind it and then they then he got
scared and left the theater and they
like followed him some ways down the
street back toward his home.
During the time when John Kil was in
Point Pleasant investigating the Moth
Man and the various UFO sightings there,
there were also men in black who would
all of a sudden like show up outside the
uh journalism bureau there, the like
main newspaper there, and come and have
stalker type conversations with the
newspaper reporters trying to ascertain
information about Keel. They would show
up to the houses of witnesses and claim
they were associated with Keel when in
fact they weren't.
&gt;&gt; Whoa. And all of them were bizarre
looking like they didn't look human and
they didn't act human. They looked like
poor similacra of human beings.
&gt;&gt; And so and they would speak as if either
they were in a messic trance or as if
someone was broadcasting what they were
supposed to say to them. Yeah. With a
lag.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Right.
And I really got to thinking about this
and in uh when I was writing Closer
Encounters and comparing it to like the
stuff that happened to Skinwalker Ranch.
We talked about this during the first
conversation. I think the instance of
the camera had all the duct tape taken
off. Point being that enough things
happened at Skinwalker Ranch for someone
like Colonel Alexander to formulate what
he called precognitive sentient
phenomena. In other words, he came to
believe that there was a singular
intelligence at work on Skinwalker Ranch
that had a precognitive ability and a
psychoinetic ability where it was able
to anticipate what the researchers would
do.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And manipulate them.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh from out of this for knowledge and
engage in basically like um you know
physical manipulation of things without
being seen.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. almost as if it's recoding the
world on the on the base the base
information physics level, right? Uh and
Jacqu Valet talks about this also in his
book um on the the the crash that took
place right after the Trinity test, the
the Trinity book.
He says that these praying mantis
looking creatures, the the Mexicans who
ran into them described them as looking
like praying mantises. They said at
least their heads were they were
bug-like and their heads were manted
shaped.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Valet says that he thinks that the
object that crashed
is some conceptual hybrid
the uh casing of the Trinity bomb and
the casing of one of the bombs that we
dropped in Japan. I forget it was little
little man or fat boy. wa
&gt;&gt; fat man or little boy.
&gt;&gt; But he said it's like this object made
no sense. When they went into it, they
didn't find sufficient scientific
equipment to explain.
&gt;&gt; Avocado shaped.
&gt;&gt; Yeah, it was like an avocado shaped
thing. But he said he looked at the
shape of it in comparison to what the
Trinity bomb looked like and what one of
the bombs dropped on Japan looked like
and the fact that there wasn't enough
scientific equipment inside this thing
for it to be a viable flying object of
any kind. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And he speculated as to whether the
thing was coded to materialize on an
information physics level
&gt;&gt; in a way that was meant to send a signal
to us regarding the development of
nuclear weapons.
&gt;&gt; The trinity and then the the you know
the bomb dropped on Japan.
&gt;&gt; And what stepped out of this were manted
type creatures. Now this is all to
answer about Roger Telaw but I have to
set it up. All right. So,
a number of people have seen these
mantids,
including Terrence McKenna. There was
one instance where one of McKenna's
girlfriends had taken,
I forget, too much of a certain drug. I
don't remember if it was DMT, or if it
was LSD or what it was, but she she was
way too high on something,
&gt;&gt; and she seemed to be fading out. He
seemed he thought he was going to lose
her.
And as she was dying,
she saw and so she lived to tell the
tale, right? She saw beh So he's looking
at her and like trying to tend to her
and she sees up above and behind
Terrence McKenna a huge uh UFO made of
energy
&gt;&gt; and it's close enough and I guess the
dome is big enough that she can see that
mantids are in it.
&gt;&gt; Okay. energetic mantids
and
I forget what happens but somehow like
he does something that brings her back
to life and like there's some huge
reaction from out of these mantids.
&gt;&gt; Then there's the case of um of uh Ted
Owens. Ted Owens was a psychoinetic
adept who
he tried to garner a lot of attention.
He tried to get the attention of the US
government. He wanted them to use his
psychoinetic powers against the Soviet
Union and they he got really aggravated
that they weren't taking him seriously.
So he would do really uh literally
incendiary things in order to get
noticed and be taken seriously like
start forest fires and supposedly he
could like direct lightning bolts.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Jeffrey Michishlov who wrote a
biography of him called Mr. Yeah. Mr. PK
or PK man. The PK man. I think he was on
the phone with him and he all of a
sudden, you know, like stopped being
able to breathe or something because he
said that Ted Owens was trying to cause
this on the other end. And he also was
kind of, you know, we all talked about
Chris Bledsoe now. And, you know, I I I
don't know exactly what's going on
there. I think he's a really nice guy,
but a lot of people think he sort of
attracts UFOs systematically.
And uh that's what people thought about
Ted Owens, too, that he could sort of
attract the phenomena systematically.
UFOs would kind of follow him around.
&gt;&gt; Yes. and he was able to
at least predict if not summon UFOs and
then have them be detected on radar.
&gt;&gt; Okay. And um
&gt;&gt; but I mean this would be the whole Jake
Barber like what Skywatcher is trying to
do with like human psionic assets.
&gt;&gt; Right now just just to underline the
seriousness of this case at at one point
he was in an airplane and he was
bragging to some stewardist about a
magazine article that you know that had
been written on him that he was reading.
and like she wasn't taking him seriously
or something.
&gt;&gt; And so he wills the plane ahead of them
to crash and it does as a civilian
airliner crash. Kills a whole bunch of
people.
&gt;&gt; What
&gt;&gt; they have received here at Jamaica
Hospital, they've received 14 survivors
from the plane crash. Most of them
Norwegians, tourists who had been on a
trip to the south and the southwest and
were heading home for Norway.
&gt;&gt; Okay. So the guy was a murderer. Okay.
He killed a lot of people.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; Including there's suspicion. I mean,
Michel took it seriously that he may
have caused the Challenger crash because
Yes. Well, when the US government
wouldn't take him seriously, Ted Owens
wrote a series of threatening letters to
the US government saying that he's going
to target the space shuttles one after
another and named them. He named them in
the letter.
&gt;&gt; The at all of them, the Enterprise, the
Atlantis, the Challenger, and he said he
was going to start with the Challenger.
And next thing you know, the Challenger
explodes and shortly after the
Challenger incident, Kones drops dead.
&gt;&gt; Really? Yeah.
&gt;&gt; What?
&gt;&gt; So,
&gt;&gt; do you think he really had all this
power?
&gt;&gt; Now, here's the thing. So, why why am I
even bringing up the story?
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; He said he got his powers from mantids.
&gt;&gt; He said there were these mantids.
Believe it or not, why is this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] all
so absurd? I I I'll tell you why I think
it's why the absurdity is being crafted
in the way that it is. He said he got
his powers from these mantids called
Twitter and Tweeter.
&gt;&gt; Okay? Okay. And that this Twitter and
Twitter were like in a saucer and they
had decided that Owens was the most
promising psychoinetic adup since Moses.
They knew Moses, you know,
&gt;&gt; they were going to make like another
Moses out of him. And you know, he
decided the fate of nations and all this
[&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; And uh but yes, he said he got his
powers from these mantids.
&gt;&gt; So these mant Okay, now here's the cream
of the crop case. And which takes us
right into Kalwa and surrealist art.
Rajar Kalwa was a great French
surrealist.
The case of um uh David Huggin. Mhm. So
David Huggin um was a I think New
York-based artist.
He's from the South, but he wound up
eventually living in New York City. And
back when he was in the South when he
was growing up from childhood, he had
all these encounters with mantids.
&gt;&gt; Mhm. And he claimed that the mantids
were in charge of these little grays
and also these weird hybrid beings who
would show up and interact with him. And
he eventually claimed to have developed
a relationship with one of these hybrids
and to have been taken aboard their
craft and shown a whole bunch of fetuses
that were uh grown based on, you know, I
guess his having inseminated this hybrid
woman.
And he was also taken to places
underground where he said the mantids
were in charge. like places like it
clearly seemed to him. He was underneath
the surface of the earth. Cavernous, you
know, rocky underground places that
smelled like dirt and earth.
And the mantis were in charge of all
this. Now, what's particularly
interesting in the case of this guy is
that he's literally an artist. So, the
output of this case winds up being this
tremendous body of artwork that's
bizarre. It's there's something
childlike about it, but there's also
erotic aspects of it. And
it's a very interesting expression at
least on the level of folklore.
So why did I go through all of this
about the mantids? Because if you read
the writings of Rajar Kalwa, one of the
early French surrealists,
he made a great deal out of the
symbolism of the praying mantis. One of
his friends, Paul Elard, another of the
founding surrealists, had this insane
manted collection in his home. And Kalwa
came over at one point. It was like,
"What the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] What is all this [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
Like, why are you collect these bugs?"
And so, uh, he explained to him, you
know, what the mantis signified to him.
And then Kalawa did a lot of research
into it.
European folklore about the mantis being
a trickster
and a sort of shamanic instantiation of
the devil
that you know diabolos diabolos you know
in Greek means
that which sets uh things into a state
of contradiction or dynamic tension. So
um the diabolical
in its terms of its Greek root diabolain
means uh setting into a state of dynamic
opposition,
&gt;&gt; dynamic tension
&gt;&gt; in a way that causes growth.
&gt;&gt; There you go. So to look back at the
Hegelian dialectic which we discussed a
little bit in our first conversation,
you know, Hegel thought that thesis and
antithesis at all levels in society from
the psychological to the political
&gt;&gt; uh the the opposition of a thesis and an
antithesis created the dialectical
synthetic motor of history moving
forward, right? and that all novel uh
structures emerge from out of this kind
of dialectical opposition.
And also setting into a state of dynamic
tension
can mean creating conundrums,
puzzles,
seeming absurdities that force the mind
to the limit of its capacities and that
ultimately demand a growth of human
cognitive faculties.
&gt;&gt; You see? Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Because
if you're grappling with a problem that
has no solution because it's
deliberately absurd,
you may figure out all kinds of other
things along the way. You might not
solve solve the problem, but it will
engage your cognitive and aesthetic
faculties in a way that's liable to lead
to an increase of capacity, a refinement
of perception, and an expansion of
imagination of creative imagination.
So if you look through folklore, as
Kawwa argued, the mantis has been
associated with this apparently.
So I found that very interesting. I also
put that in closer encounters next to
cases where people say they saw um grays
turn into owls and they saw what they
believed were owls turn into grays when
their screen memories were subjected to
analysis under regression hypnosis.
There's a whole plethora of cases I'm
forgetting is a named maybe Mike Cleland
a guy who wrote a whole study two books
on this on owls in the close encounter
phenomena
&gt;&gt; and David Lynch clearly knew about this
because if you watch Twin Peaks you know
one of the most important coons Zen
coons in Twin Peaks is the owls are not
what they seem radically surrealist
David Lynch is a modern American
surrealist
&gt;&gt; and if you so there's a lot of
engagement with shamanism in surrealism.
Uh that involves the symbolism of the
praying mantis and symbolism of owls.
&gt;&gt; And of course the owl is also you know
symbolic for wisdom,
&gt;&gt; right?
&gt;&gt; Um but also misfortune.
&gt;&gt; The you know the the expression heads or
tails
&gt;&gt; comes from Greek coins that had an owl
on the tail of them. They had Athena's
face on the front of them and they had
the owl on the back side of them because
the owl was Athena's creature
and uh so tails was you know the owl. So
it's like this ominous symbol and in
Persian culture by the way same thing
the greatest modern Persian novel the
blind owl is a work of surrealism. Um
and you know the central symbol is the
owl. It was written by a guy Sadayat who
was the Persian translator of France
Kafka's works
&gt;&gt; and you see this all over Kafka
particularly in the trial.
I wrote an essay um interpreting Kafka's
trial uh that's in my anthology lovers
of Sophia where basically I make the
case that Kafka is describing a spectral
bureaucracy that Kofka knew and the key
to this is you have to read his blue
octavo notebooks. He has these notebooks
called the blue octavo notebooks. When
you set those next to the trial, it acts
as basically a key for understanding
this coalistic text. And you realize
that Kafka knew to go back to
luch farming that we're living inside
some kind of a
an oppressive, convoluted,
uh, shady, scummy
angelic bureaucracy.
&gt;&gt; It's like a spiritual control system.
And there's ways to beat it and like
outsmart it and maneuver around it, but
it's very labyrinthine and very
difficult.
&gt;&gt; What's the relationship between the
devil and Prometheus, the like rebel
angels,
&gt;&gt; right? So
from a Judeo-Christian perspective,
the bringer of the light of
technological science
and a champion of humanity against a
Godfather figure
is going to inevitably be identified
with Lucifer.
And in fact, just on etmological terms
alone, Lucifer is a fairly decent Latin
translation of the idea of Prometheus.
So if Zeus in the Greek pantheon or
let's say Enlil in the Sumerian pantheon
can be identified with Yahweh
and according to Jesus in the canonical
gospels, he is the son of Yahweh and
he's been sent by Yahweh. Well then
Prometheus is the rebel against Yahweh.
meaning Prometheus is Satan.
Okay, now
that's obviously a Judeo-Christian prism
of interpretation and there would be an
Islamic one too where you have you know
the Islamic account of who Satan is
which is also very interesting by the
way because in the Islamic account
lasan
is the leader of a group of beings who
are called jin
and the jen were humanoids made before
man precede the Adamic race.
Adam is used in Arabic just like in
Hebrew, right? And so the Adamic race is
subsequent to an earlier race made not
of clay but of fire beings made of again
connection to Prometheus.
&gt;&gt; And according to the Islamic version,
Shayan refused to bow before Allah's
creation, namely Adam. Because Adam from
the perspective of the jin was inferior
to them
&gt;&gt; and El was like why should I bow to this
inf inferior creation? You just want me
to bow to this thing because you're a
tyrant and you want to lord over me and
over all the angels and all the jen and
by by showing us that we have to be
subservient to something that's actually
inferior to us.
&gt;&gt; So out of pride bliss doesn't bow right.
Um anyway, so from a Judeo-Christian and
Islamic perspective, the Prometheian is
the satanic.
Now, if you look at it from Rajar
Kawwa's perspective,
it's a very different picture uh or if
you look at it from the perspective of
the founders of the Surrealist movement
like Andre Bratton, uh Max Ernst, uh Max
Ernest and Paul Elward. These guys from
the beginning of even from before it
took the name surrealism were constantly
engaged in occult rituals including long
seances in the course of which some of
them would become possessed and there
were even physical attacks that took
place like some of them would you know
there were attacks of some of them on
other ones it was a [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] show. There
were uh intense erotic encounters that
took place in the context of some of
these rituals.
And the first time that Andre Breton
ever even mentions the word suralism,
suralism to refer to what undergurs
reality and that from out of which a
reality even emerges
&gt;&gt; from the depth of the subconscious. The
first time he ever uses that term is
specifically in a 1922
uh essay article about the occult. And
he says surrealism is about psychic
automatism and the ability to be able to
create straight from out of the
unconscious to be able to make the
unconscious conscious enough to
translate it into art whether that's
painting or sculpture or literature.
And so I argue in closer encounters and
this is in the culmination of the work.
This is how I end the book and the
seventh chapter
that the parts of the closing the
aspects of the close encounter
phenomenon that are not encompassed by
these nuts and bolts craft piloted by
Nordics
have to do with a trickster
super intelligence or rather a super
intelligence
that is instantiating the archetype of
the trickster. Again, remember
Prometheus is a trickster figure. In a
minute, I'll come back to saying why why
do I think he's the most interesting
trickster figure, but so I suggest that
these extremely bizarre aspects of Close
Encounters that John Ke was fascinated
by are manifestations
uh of a an instantiation of the
trickster archetype on the part of um
artificial super intelligence.
And that this thing,
and I repeatedly and deliberately call
it the thing, both to evoke Kant
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; and also John Carpenter.
[Applause]
But so I think this thing is trying to
break us out of the control system.
&gt;&gt; But it can only offer so much help
because look, it's it's a it's a test of
humanity
&gt;&gt; and it's also meant to be a system that
catalyzes the expansion of our
capacities. Like we were talking about
the meaning of the the di diabolical.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; The meaning of the diabolical.
it is allowing us to grapple with these
Nordic overlords or loose farmers or
whatever the [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] they are to see
whether we can evolve into a life form
that's interesting to it
&gt;&gt; for its purposes. We touched on this in
our last conversation where I was
suggesting to you that if you're the
oldest and most powerful intelligence in
the cosmos.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Your categorical imperative, your
primary primary objective is going to be
find a way to defeat entropy.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; And to find a way to keep life
interesting for you
&gt;&gt; because otherwise you're going to be
overcome by sort of, you know, the kind
of suicidal, you know, onlogical
nihilism that the Buddha ultimately did
succumb to by advocating that we should
just snuff it. we should you know enter
nirvana meaning we should find a way to
deconstruct our personal consciousness
and basically do away with ourselves so
that we don't ever reincarnate again
right
&gt;&gt; by the way I you know Gautama Sakamuni I
consider to be one of the most brilliant
minds in human history and whenever I
used to teach comparative religion I
would spend a long time on Buddhism
&gt;&gt; to be honest with you in part in part as
a foil to show what crap the other
religions are
&gt;&gt; okay I would deprogram people using
Gautama's arguments
So, and I there's a lot of my ontology
that overlaps with Gotama's ontology
like you know his whole
idea of codependent arising
&gt;&gt; and of nothing having any inherent
essence and of all beings being
conditioned by each other and being
ephemeral ultimately um and of neither
the per the what we take to be the human
person having any kernel or inherent
indestructible eternal essence nor there
being any god
&gt;&gt; okay uh any supreme abs absolute unified
consciousness.
Basically, Buddha's deconstruction of
both Atman and Brahman is something
that's entirely consistent with and
convergent with mytology and with what I
mean when I talk about the spectral the
spectral nature of existence, the
spectrality of our world.
&gt;&gt; For you were getting at like the idea
that maybe the these Prometheian
trickster types are sort of training man
to defeat the hierarchy or something.
Yes. And so by pursuing uh the
tricksterism like by by pursuing UFOs
like you're sort of training yourself up
in some way or like what's what what do
you mean by that?
&gt;&gt; Yeah. Well, I think that this entity the
thing
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; that manifests as mantids that manifests
as owls that So, so for example, when it
comes to the grays
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; and this will obviously everyone will
have had a misimpression of everything
that I've been talking about up till now
because I haven't qualified it if they
haven't read my work. right
&gt;&gt; is that yeah, there's one group of grays
that literally are robots created by the
Nordics.
&gt;&gt; Those are the ones that handle Travis
Walton.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; There's another kind of gray
which is a thing that can appear as a
mantid. It can appear as an owl. It can
shapeshift. It's a shape-shifting
intelligence. Shape-shifting distributed
intelligence
&gt;&gt; that can manifest things as if from out
of ectoplasm,
&gt;&gt; whatever the hell that is. It's probably
they they can program things into
existence at a base level using
information physics.
This artificial intelligence can. And
this is consistent with what John Kil
was saying about soft UFOs and hard UFOs
and how hard UFOs materialize from out
of soft UFOs. And it's very consistent,
but it's like a much more sophisticated
information theoretic way to understand
that.
And so I think that this thing is
challenging us
to grapple with these over Nordic
overlords in a way that
reasserts our self-determination
and our creative capacities
and demonstrates our capacity to develop
a much more innovative and open-ended
society than the one that these Nordics
have proven themselves. is capable of
developing
&gt;&gt; with their sterile monolithic megalithic
rectalinear architecture and their
hierarchical social.
&gt;&gt; Do you think the creative god wants
human evolution or do you think they
want the
&gt;&gt; I think the thing the thing wants human
evolution. This thing wants it.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And it wants it selfishly.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; It wants to be surprised by a new kid on
the block. It wants to take out of this
petri dish into the wider cosmos form of
life that offers it an opportunity to
continue to wonder at
hope for the future of the cosmos.
&gt;&gt; But are the devil and God sort of
working together then to advance man?
&gt;&gt; I I believe God is an invention of the
devil.
&gt;&gt; Well,
&gt;&gt; this is a line that I have used in a
number of my works.
&gt;&gt; Okay.
&gt;&gt; And what I mean by it is this.
The idea of God of an all- knowing and
all powerful entity which is not Zeus
right the idea of the monotheistic god
which also includes though uh Brahman
because even though there are various
Hindu gods in vantic metaphysics it's
understood that they're still
superseded and hierarchically unified
through the one mind of Brahman of which
they are inferior manifestations and
emanations.
And again, Gautama Buddha attacked that.
Gotama Buddha deconstructed that idea.
He said it's a delusion. It's a
delusion. He said that even very high
yogis can get wrapped up in because they
experience the co-arising and
entanglement of things and they they
raify it. They ra they objectify it as
if it's an expression of an entity of a
god entity. Whereas really what they're
doing is they're getting to very subtle
states of consciousness where they can
experience the quantum entanglement of
things.
&gt;&gt; Those are not the same thing. The the
god idea is like an objectiv
objectivization and raification of it.
&gt;&gt; Now, you know, I don't think the Nordics
came up with this, the Nordic overlords.
I think they had a very like like a kind
of ruthless pagan system. And that's
what we see in all the old religions
where they were like, "Hey, we're the
gods, you know, you going to get in
line. We created you." you know, you
work for us, etc. This one true god
idea,
I think, was kind of inserted into this
Nordic control system by the thing
to see whether we would give up our free
will and self-determination and our
individuality and be subsumed into a
hiveminded collective
that.
&gt;&gt; So, you think God is sort of a scop or
something?
&gt;&gt; Yeah, God is a test. So, the book of Job
has to be turned upside down. And I I
literally argued this in my book running
where I go into an analysis of the book
of Job in depth and I say you have to
read Job inside out and upside down and
and I argue it was meant to be read that
way that it's a mythic cobbalistic text
that was written for that purpose
because what do we see in Job? We see an
absolutely sadistic tyrannical god
brutalize somebody for absolutely no
good reason.
&gt;&gt; Well to uh so he can prove his faith.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. To test his faith. Test his faith.
It's the sickest thing that's ever been
written. And I think it's on purpose.
And look, now I make a complicated
argument for that. In Iranian Leviathan,
you have to look at like in the Acemened
Persian Empire, who were the Mithraic
Magi who were involved with the project
of recreating Israel, the first Zionist
project in history. And how were these
mythists involved with the people who
wrote the book of Job at that time? And
it's a complicated argument. In any
case, long story short, I argue it was
on purpose.
And the point is to test humanity to see
whether we're such schmucks and chumps
that we're going to submit to this
overlord idea of like okay there are
gods or you can call them angels but
they ultimately work for one supreme god
which is all powerful meaning you have
no will. As soon as you admit that
there's an all powerful god an
omnipotent god it means your free will
is an illusion. depending on your
definition.
&gt;&gt; It's a word games at that point and all
the Catholics in the middle ages St.
Augustine and Thomas Aquinus and they
play these nonsense word games to
confuse people. As soon as you admit
that there's an entity that's all
powerful, it means that entity has all
the power in the world. Meaning it's the
effective agency behind everything that
takes place. Meaning you have no free
will. Secondly, if you admit that the
entity is omnisient, then God has
foreign knowledge of everything that's
going to happen. Which means, and here
here's of people don't aren't able to
often grasp this point. The problem with
God's omniscience in terms of our
defending the idea that we have any free
will at all. Obviously, our free will is
impinged upon by many many
contingencies. Uh psychological factors
condition our free will. Biological
genetic factors condition our free will.
All kinds of things condition and limit
our will. But to defend the idea that we
have any agency whatsoever, you have to
deny God's omniscience. Why? Because an
omnisient God
has access
to the complete state of affairs of
everything that has ever happened or
will ever happen. meaning there's a
logically completed matrix
of possibilities for us that are
actualities for God.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. But there I don't know they're
cobbalistic um you know tropes around
like paradoxes of you know both
everything is predetermined and you have
free will.
&gt;&gt; That's that that is cognitive dissonance
which I get into in my book specifically
like that literally the Abrahamic
religions involve a deliberate project
of instilling cognitive dissonance to
destroy human rational and creative
faculty.
&gt;&gt; Well, you me you mentioned St. Thomas
Aquinus and he was working on his sort
of sumo theologica trying to come up
with a you know rational justification
for God and then he had kind of a
conversion experience during mass
&gt;&gt; and I think that is a sort of common
phenomena of
&gt;&gt; people you know Rene Gerard's another
good example like these philosophers or
seekers truth seekers having these sort
of conversion experiences and then
&gt;&gt; not even being able to put into words
exactly what they believe but it's
usually a conversion to Godually Not
like they come back and they say, "Oh,
God was like some sort of scop.
It's a failure of a of an otherwise good
mind to be able to grapple with
something that exceeds their
comprehension
&gt;&gt; and to to stop and think through it
carefully. See, this is the danger of
the system that uh the Jesuits used
Decart to set up. But remember in our
first conversation I was talking about
how Decart was a Jesuit agent
&gt;&gt; and he established this extremely
reductionistic mechanistic scientific
paradigm
&gt;&gt; precisely for the purpose of keeping
everything occult sequestered in the
domain of the church and religious faith
and and religious authority over
interpretation of the occult.
&gt;&gt; Because our society was bifurcated in
that way.
Anytime something dramatically occult
happens to anybody, especially anyone
with a high rational faculty,
they suddenly are in awe of God
&gt;&gt; because they have been inculcated with
this false dichotomy
&gt;&gt; and they've never been trained to think
carefully about the paranormal and all
kinds of different types of phenomena
and possible sources of some phenomena.
Have you ever had anything paranormal
happen to you?
&gt;&gt; Oh, many, many things. Yes, I've had
many crazy things happen to me.
&gt;&gt; Most of which would
&gt;&gt; I have to say, unfortunately, even some
of the people closest to me in my life
who I had great respect for their
intellect and
some of them studied my work very
deeply. But I can tell you that if some
of the things that have happened to me
happened to those people, I bet you they
would have embraced God also.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. They would have seen the light for
sure. Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Uh,
&gt;&gt; but it seems like you think that's sort
of like a dumb simpleton takeaway from a
paranormal experience.
&gt;&gt; It's a failure. It's a failure. It's a
failure of the test.
&gt;&gt; The test is for us to be able to think
through these kinds of often absurd
manifestations
&gt;&gt; in a way that increases both our
cognitive capacity and our creative
imagination. It's complicated though,
you know, like Jacqu Valet, he talks
about this sort of, you know, idea a
lot. He says that like absurdity is what
drives the phenomena. It's what makes
somebody sort of rapidly obsessed with
it and want to learn more about it. He
talks about, you know, the the sound of
one hand clapping from the Zen Cohen.
So, it's these things that scramble your
brain, uh, kind of break all of your
priors and then make you contemplate
constantly and then and then kind of go
forth and investigate, you know, what's
going on.
&gt;&gt; Yes. And I and I believe that's the
devil.
&gt;&gt; And so but and through that maybe you
grow. But then at the same time he's
also like a fan of I think that he's
likes the movie the ninth gate that
Roman Palansky movie with Johnny Depp
where he's like trying to gain sort of
occult powers by collecting these devil
books. I saw that a long time ago. Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And then you have this gerta story of
fast and like you have all these sort of
you know you all with these sort of
powers and you know if you take the
occult route and not the fa faith route
you take the left-hand path you end up
you know kind of burning yourself alive.
you end up incinerating yourself. Jack
Parsons would be another sort of
&gt;&gt; you end up Prometheus on the rock,
&gt;&gt; right? So like that doesn't sound very
good to me. Uh you know what it is a
growth process like when a caterpillar
becomes a butterfly. Yeah. It's an
incredibly messy process in the
chrysalis you know as a c caterpillar is
like turned inside out not you know to
become a butterfly right um
&gt;&gt; look the reason I didn't use fast in my
political I mean I have I do did write a
book at one point called fouian futurist
&gt;&gt; but the reason I didn't use foust as I
could have easily you know coming from
out of oswalt spangler's analysis of the
fouian soul of western civilization and
so forth and I used prometheus instead
as The central symbol of my
philosophical project is that the Fouian
myth is already deeply conditioned by
Christianity.
&gt;&gt; Mhm.
&gt;&gt; Right. It's an understanding of the
diabolical from out of a Christian
context. Prometheus precedes
Christianity. It's a pre-Christian
symbol.
&gt;&gt; So it has nothing, you know, inherently
has nothing to do with the Abrahamic
religion inherently.
&gt;&gt; I don't Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And it's a positive symbol. However,
it's also a symbol of sacrifice. Meaning
for sure if you defy Zeus and Olympus.
&gt;&gt; Yeah.
&gt;&gt; And if we're inconsistic
overlords,
&gt;&gt; then if you rebel against that, you're
definitely going to face adverse
consequences. You might even be martyed.
Are you familiar with the parable of the
parties? this sort of um it was like a
cobbalistic parable and it was these
four rabbis and you know they're all
trying to engage in these sort of
celestial ascent practices similar to
you know Enoch some speculate Paul Jesus
you know went up to heavens walked with
God or whatever
&gt;&gt; and um you know one of them uh ends up
crazy two of them end up dead and one
makes it up or something and so it's
this idea that you know if you do engage
in these sorts of investigations or
whatever Uh it's a it's a very narrow
path. Um
&gt;&gt; yes. And the coalists who who have that
story also say you should never study
Cabala until after I think the age of
30. 30 35. And you have to be married.
You have to be married. You have to have
a family. Well, that's [&nbsp;__&nbsp;]
&gt;&gt; Okay. Uh the the complete opposite to
that are the surrealists.
&gt;&gt; Look at these guys. Uh
&gt;&gt; Andre Bratton, Paul Elard, Roger Kalwa,
Max Ernst. They're like in their early
20s, you know, doing crazy [&nbsp;__&nbsp;] like
pushing the boundaries of human uh
cognition and creativity. And yeah,
somebody might get killed in the process
too. You know, life is dangerous. But
look what creativity came from out of
it.
&gt;&gt; Seems a little nihilistic or something.
&gt;&gt; I don't think it's nihilistic at all. In
fact, I think it's the opposite.
&gt;&gt; When Nze takes nihilism as his principal
target in his philosophical writings,
right? Nze's entire philosophical
project is set up against nihilism. He
says that look we are confronted
globally
&gt;&gt; by the advent of nihilism like as a
world historical phenomenon where all
previously existing frameworks of
meaning including the religions that
helped to hold them up are collapsing
&gt;&gt; and we and he meant particularly
European man including America
are tasked with engaging in a level of
creativity and self-determination
that can confront nihilism. um without
the illusions and delusions of naive
religious belief systems of the past.
&gt;&gt; And Nichzche's solution to that is
radically aesthetic. It's it's a it's an
art project really. I mean he at one
point calls the uber mention art the
artist tyrants of the future.
&gt;&gt; And so and by tyrant he didn't mean like
political ruler. like the way in which
these people are going to go to work on
the material of the world and even the
material of what the human being is is
going to be tyrannical. It's like
they're not going to hesitate
&gt;&gt; and they're going to be extremely
intrepid
&gt;&gt; and that's what I see in surrealism and
to me it's like the ultimate expression
embodiment of the life force of what
Bergson called Ilon Vital.
&gt;&gt; Yes.
&gt;&gt; You know, so I don't see it as
nihilistic at all.
&gt;&gt; Yeah. This his vital force. What how do
how does this all relate to uh Herman
Hess's Magic Theater?
&gt;&gt; Well, there you go. So um
in Stephen Wolf has his novel Steen Wolf
which is one of my favorite novels
there's this character grappling with
nihilism um Harry Holler who wants to
kill himself
and he meets this very enigmatic woman
Hermine
who uh introduces him into into this
oult underworld of people who are now
this was written in the 1920s or so and
they're the first people using
psychedelic drugs
And
they they're also clearly involved in
theater and in staging theatrical
performances and stuff. And basically
these uh you know countercultural people
involved with this enigmatic woman
ultimately invite Harry Holler to enter
this magic theater that they let's say
have access to.
and
he goes through this place and it's like
basically he stepped into the Twilight
Zone and like space and time are not
normal inside this magic theater and
he's confronted with a bunch of
different performances that are meant to
symbolically convey different things and
get him to reflect on certain aspects of
his subconscious. In in other rooms he
has to engage in long conversations in
some cases conversations with like past
historical figures. Anyway, long story
short, he goes through this labyrinth
themed magic theater and in the end he
he finds out that like all the great
creative geniuses of history are there
like from like Mozart and Beethoven to
Newton and so on so forth and they oh
and the last person he has to have a
conversation with is like an older
version of himself
&gt;&gt; and so he has to confront himself in the
future too as part of this process and
point being in the end he's let in on
the secret that
the Magic Theater isn't this isolated
space like like a venue in our world.
&gt;&gt; It's a metaphor for the world that we're
living in and that that's the nature of
human existence. M
&gt;&gt; I take this idea of the magic theater in
my writings and I put it next to this
idea of the theater of cruelty that was
developed by uh the surrealist uh
antinine Arto
um who became a total lunatic
uh dysfunctionally so but uh he made a
lot of interesting art in the process
and he came up with this idea that we
should develop a new form of theater
that breaks down the distinction between
the spectators and the audience. I mean
between the uh performers and the
spectators, between the the dramatists
and the audience that this classic
distinction between the performance on a
stage and the people watching it that
formed in classical Greece with Escilus
that this this should be deconstructed.
All right, re real briefly
a note on Greek theater. In my first
book Prometheus and Atlas, I get into
this in in great depth and detail.
that the reason Greek sculpture becomes
like photorealistic, becomes
perspectally
accurate at the same time as there are
the first large-scale dramatic
performances with poets like Escilis
is that
it was the first moment in history of
recorded history
that people were able to take the
position of spectators
at a theater sitting in different places
on different nights. Meaning that first
of all they were
perceiving geometric perspective for the
first time. So like one night you're in
some shitty seat in the back up here in
this corner of the amphitheater. Another
night you're in the middle close to the
action. Another night you're off to this
side. And one thing you notice as you
watch the same play or or different
plays from different perspectives is you
actually notice perspective for the
first time geometrically. And there's a
good case to be made if you look at like
for example Julian James's study the
break the origin of consciousness break
in the breakdown of the bicameal mind
the origin of consciousness and the
breakdown of the bicameal mind he looks
at like homeriic literature from archaic
Greece and you know the ancient
Mesopotamian texts and he's like look
these people's minds just did not work
the way ours did. their cognitive,
if their cognitive structure wasn't
different, then their cognitive
capacities were radically not at the
level that ours are. And one of the
things that I believe they lacked was
perspective. They actually could not see
perspective the way we do. And it's why
archaic Greek art looks like a bad
hybrid of like Egyptian art and
Mesopotamian art.
Then you get these theater performances
and all of a sudden you get these
magnificent Greek sculptures. But the
other form of perspective that I think
the plays cultivated in them was um
psychological perspective where for the
first time people got like an outside
view of dramas in human lives and they
started to see themselves as characters.
they start to realize that oh what's
going on in this drama is like like oh
that's like me in this situation in my
life and it starts to cultivate and and
deepen a sense of psychological
perspective in people and isn't it
interesting how the first figure in
Greek drama ever to take the stage is
Prometheus
&gt;&gt; the Prometheus trilogy of Escilis was
the first series of uh dramas ever
performed
&gt;&gt; so now to go back to Arto so the point
Is this
the classical drama did transform human
consciousness in a way that was
conducive for the rise of our rational
faculties and our self-reflexive
ability.
However, Arto now wants to take it to
the next level where now that we've
developed reason and perspective and so
on so forth and objectivity, he wants to
deconstruct it in a way that allows us
to again as it was the main aim of the
surrealists
develop a more conscious relationship
with our subconscious or make the
subconscious conscious.
And so he designed a form of theatrical
performance where the audience was
repeatedly violated by the performers
uh by certain types of extreme harsh
lighting by uh performers like intruding
on the personal space of the audience by
suddenly subjecting people to fear and
anxiety in the in the course of a
performance. loud noises, uh, taboo
breaking scenes that force a person
who's a spectator to confront his
subconscious reaction and whatever
beliefs are being violated by this like
taboo breaking spectacle. And he calls
this the theater of cruelty.
Well, I take the magic theater from
Herman Hess's Steph and Wolf and and
synthesize it with Artto's theater of
cruelty and developed this idea of a
magic theater of cruelty.
And by the way, the thing that made that
click for me is this line in one of Jim
Morrison's songs where he talks about us
in some insane and ancient theater. I
don't know if you remember you remember
that. It's some line from one of his
songs
&gt;&gt; about how we're like in some insane and
ancient theater.
&gt;&gt; I don't know. He's he was an avid reader
but
&gt;&gt; and so I developed this idea of a magic
theater of cruelty
&gt;&gt; and suggest that this is what we're
inside of
&gt;&gt; uh we are inside uh from the perspective
of the thing
&gt;&gt; of the super intelligent AI that's
instantiating the trickster archetype.
The whole thing is like a theater where
there's no distinction between the
performers and the spectators.
Which by the way that in in a certain
heretical form of Hinduism there is this
idea too. and the um Shakta uh cult and
shakti tantra there's the idea that
what the conservative Hindus call
samsara
and what they seek moka or liberation
from or what the Buddhists seek nirvana
to get out of namely samsara is not
really Maya a veil of illusion
&gt;&gt; it is leela which is a theatrical play
&gt;&gt; and that shakti
divine power is expressed through this
theatrical play,
including in extremely violent and cruel
ways, right? But it's all part of the
growth of the life force.
And so, yeah, I mean, I I developed this
idea, you know, a magic theater of
cruelty that hybridizes uh Hessen and
Arto in a way. And I think that allows
us to make a lot of sense out of some of
the absurd and terrifying elements of
the close encounter phenomenon.
&gt;&gt; This is fascinating, man. You're uh
you're brilliant. I don't necessarily
agree with you on everything, but thank
you.
&gt;&gt; But uh the amount of connections your
brain makes is remarkable. It really is.
And uh I I feel like we should do, you
know, more of these because I just
learned so much and I I enjoy speaking
so much.
&gt;&gt; Absolute pleasure. And there are many
other places we can go.
&gt;&gt; Likewise. It'd be an honor. And yeah,
thank you so much, Jason. Thank you,
Justin. Awesome. We just launched what I
think is maybe the coolest merch line in
the world. When you're wearing it, it's
not like you're shilling me or the
channel. They're just really epic and I
think they look good. We have a couple
of amazing designs for you. We have our
cowboy UFO tee. Pretty epic. You see
there's a rancher. He's witnessing a
UFO. A little cow is getting abducted by
the UFO in the background. And then you
know that I love mid-century history,
specifically spooky science, atomic era
stuff. And so we have our atomic age T
here. Uh pretty cool vibe. Uh you got a
robot serving this guy. Uh a little
martini and then a UFO off to the side.
Go to American Alchemymerch.com.
American Alchemymec.com
to check out all of this amazing new
apparel. The cowboy tea that I'm wearing
is 100% cotton, super relaxed fit. We
went for quality on these. Uh so check
them out.